Towards
Sustainable Global
Food Systems:
Conceptual and Policy
Analysis of Agriculture, Food
and Environment Linkages
Ruerd Ruben and Jan Verhagen
www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Edited by
Printed Edition of the Special Issue Published in Sustainability
Towards Sustainable Global Food
Systems

Towards Sustainable Global Food
Systems: Conceptual and Policy
Analysis of Agriculture, Food and
Environment Linkages
Special Issue Editors
Ruerd Ruben
Jan Verhagen
MDPI • Basel • Beijing • Wuhan • Barcelona • Belgrade
Special Issue Editors
Ruerd Ruben
Wageningen University & Research
The Netherlands
Jan Verhagen
Wageningen University & Research
The Netherlands
Editorial Office
MDPI
St. Alban-Anlage 66
4052 Basel, Switzerland
This is a reprint of articles from the Special Issue published online in the open access journal
Sustainability (ISSN 2071-1050) from 2018 to 2019 (available at: https://www.mdpi.com/journal/
sustainability/special issues/Agriculture Food Environment)
For citation purposes, cite each article independently as indicated on the article page online and as
indicated below:
LastName, A.A.; LastName, B.B.; LastName, C.C. Article Title. Journal Name Year, Article Number,
Page Range.
ISBN 978-3-03897-814-5 (Pbk)
ISBN 978-3-03897-815-2 (PDF)
c 2019 by the authors. Articles in this book are Open Access and distributed under the Creative
Commons Attribution (CC BY) license, which allows users to download, copy and build upon
published articles, as long as the author and publisher are properly credited, which ensures maximum
dissemination and a wider impact of our publications.
The book as a whole is distributed by MDPI under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons
license CC BY-NC-ND.
Contents
About the Special Issue Editors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Ruerd Ruben, Jan Verhagen and Christine Plaisier
The Challenge of Food Systems Research: What Difference Does It Make?
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2019, 11, 171, doi:10.3390/su11010171 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Vincent Linderhof, Valerie Janssen and Thom Achterbosch
Does Agricultural Commercialization Affect Food Security: The Case of Crop-Producing
Households in the Regions of Post-Reform Vietnam?
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263, doi:10.3390/su11051263 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Zuzana Smeets-Kristkova, Thom Achterbosch and Marijke Kuiper
Healthy Diets and Reduced Land Pressure: Towards a Double Gain for Future Food Systems
in Nigeria
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2019, 11, 835, doi:10.3390/su11030835 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Seyi Olalekan Olawuyi and Abbyssinia Mushunje
Social Capital and Adoption of Alternative Conservation Agricultural Practices in
South-Western Nigeria
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2019, 11, 716, doi:10.3390/su11030716 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
Christine Plaisier, Milindi Sibomana, Johannes van der Waal, Luud Clercx,
Coen P. A. van Wagenberg and Youri Dijkxhoorn
Approach for Designing Context-Specific, Locally Owned Interventions to Reduce Postharvest
Losses: Case Study on Tomato Value Chains in Nigeria
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2019, 11, 247, doi:10.3390/su11010247 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
Monika Verma, Christine Plaisier, Coen P. A. vanWagenberg and Thom Achterbosch
A Systems Approach to Food Loss and Solutions: Understanding Practices, Causes,
and Indicators
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2019, 11, 579, doi:10.3390/su11030579 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
Ireen Raaijmakers, Harriette Snoek, Busie Maziya-Dixon and Thom Achterbosch
Drivers of Vegetable Consumption in Urban Nigeria: Food Choice Motives, Knowledge,
and Self-Efficacy
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771, doi:10.3390/su10124771 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
Bram Peters, Marion Herens and Jan Brouwers
Capturing Social Innovations in Agricultural Transformation from the Field: Outcomes of
a Write-Shop
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2018, 10, 4727, doi:10.3390/su10124727 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
Marion Herens, Monica Gabrielli, Bram Peters, Jan Brouwers and Diane Bosch
Farmers’ Adaptive Strategies in Balancing Commercial Farming and Consumption of
Nutritious Foods: Case Study of Myanmar
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721, doi:10.3390/su10124721 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Jan van der Lee, Laurens Klerkx, Bockline Omedo Bebe, Ashenafi Mengistu and
Simon Oosting
Intensification and Upgrading Dynamics in Emerging Dairy Clusters in the East
African Highlands
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324, doi:10.3390/su10114324 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
v
Monika Zurek, Aniek Hebinck, Adrian Leip, Joost Vervoort, Marijke Kuiper,
Maria Garrone, Petr Havl´ık, Thomas Heckelei, Sara Hornborg, John Ingram,
Anneleen Kuijsten, Lindsay Shutes, Johanna M. Geleijnse, Ida Terluin, Pieter van ’t Veer,
Jo Wijnands, Andrea Zimmermann and Thom Achterbosch
Assessing Sustainable Food and Nutrition Security of the EU Food System—An
Integrated Approach
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271, doi:10.3390/su10114271 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195
Oriana Gava, Fabio Bartolini, Francesca Venturi, Gianluca Brunori, Angela Zinnai and
Alberto Pardossi
A Reflection of the Use of the Life Cycle Assessment Tool for Agri-Food Sustainability
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2019, 11, 71, doi:10.3390/su11010071 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
Leonie Fink, Angelika Ploeger and Carola Strassner
Participative Processes as a Chance for Developing Ideas to Bridge the Intention-Behavior Gap
Concerning Sustainable Diets
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434, doi:10.3390/su10124434 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 227
Marta L´opez Cifuentes, Christian Reinhard Vogl and Mamen Cu´ellar Padilla
Participatory Guarantee Systems in Spain: Motivations, Achievements, Challenges and
Opportunities for Improvement Based on Three Case Studies
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081, doi:10.3390/su10114081 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 248
Rositsa T. Ilieva and Andreas Hernandez
Scaling-Up Sustainable Development Initiatives: A Comparative Case Study of Agri-Food
System Innovations in Brazil, New York, and Senegal
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057, doi:10.3390/su10114057 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 273
Alejandro Fontana, Ignacio de los R´ıos Carmenado, Johan Villanueva-Penedo,
Jose´ Ulloa-Salazar and Denisse Santander-Peralta
Strategy for the Sustainability of a Food Production System for the Prosperity of Low-Income
Populations in an Emerging Country: Twenty Years of Experience of the Peruvian
Poultry Association
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035, doi:10.3390/su10114035 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 290
Pauline Kamermans, Brenda Walles, Marloes Kraan, Luca A. van Duren, Frank Kleissen,
Tom M. van der Have, Aad C. Smaal and Marnix Poelman
Offshore Wind Farms as Potential Locations for Flat Oyster (Ostrea edulis) Restoration in the
Dutch North Sea
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942, doi:10.3390/su10113942 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308
Shinichiro Fujimori, Toshichika Iizumi, Tomoko Hasegawa, Jun’ya Takakura,
Kiyoshi Takahashi and Yasuaki Hijioka
Macroeconomic Impacts of Climate Change Driven by Changes in Crop Yields
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673, doi:10.3390/su10103673 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 332
vi
About the Special Issue Editors
Ruerd Ruben holds the special chair of Impact Analysis for Food Systems atWageningen University
and is research coordinator for the knowledge base program on ‘’Global Food and Nutrition
Security” at Wageningen Economic Research. He is a member of the planning and management
committee for the Consortium of International Agricultural Research Centers (CGIAR) in research
program ‘’Agriculture for Nutrition and Health” (A4NH) and a member of the steering committee
for the the International Food Policy Research Institute- International Institute for Environment and
Development (IFPRI-IIED) program “CERES 2030”. He is a board member of the Dutch FoodFirst
coalition and of the Agriprofocus network. He is actively involved in policy research and advice on
issues related to the dynamics of food systems, smallholder involvement in tropical agri-food value
chains, the effectiveness of incentives for improving healthier diets, and the impact of standards
and certification for enhancing food chain upgrading. He has published more than 100 articles in
peer-reviewed journals and co-edited 10 books with academic publishers. Ruerd lived and worked
for 14 years in Central America, where he was engaged in programs of land reform, cooperative
development, and smallholder agriculture. Thereafter, he coordinated multidisciplinary research
and training programs on food security and sustainable land use in several East and West African
countries and in China. He was the director of the independent Policy and Operations Evaluation
(IOB) department at the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Professor in Development
Effectiveness and Director of the Centre for International Development Issues (CIDIN) at Radboud
University Nijmegen.
Jan Verhagen is a generalist in soil science, agronomy, and ecology and experienced in providing
practical solutions to complex issues requiring the integration of knowledge on various fields. He
works on methodology development and the design of sustainable agricultural production systems
to address development and climate change. Jan has more than 20 years of experience working in
Europe, South-East Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa. Jan has represented the Netherlands at various
national and international climate-change-related events. In 2001 and 2007, he was a member of
the Dutch delegation to the plenary to approve the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) working group II report. From 2007 to 2015, he represented the Western European and
Others Group (WEOG) in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
Least-Developed Countries Expert Group (LEG), providing technical guidance and advice to the
least-developed countries on adaptation issues. In this capacity, he has been involved in the execution
of the National Adaptation Plans of Action and co-designed the National Adaptation Plan process.
From 2011 to 2015, he was the Dutch co-chair, with Canada, of the Inventories and Measurements
group of the Global Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases, addressing the role of
agriculture in reducing greenhouse gas emissions. For Wageningen University & Research, he has
co-led several research programs related to food security and climate change. Jan currently leads the
Wageningen policy support program on food security for the Dutch Ministry of Agriculture.
vii

sustainability
Article
The Challenge of Food Systems Research:
What Difference Does It Make?
Ruerd Ruben 1,*, Jan Verhagen 2 and Christine Plaisier 1
1 Wageningen Economic Research,Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 29703,
2502 LS The Hague, The Netherlands; christine.plaisier@wur.nl
2 Wageningen Plant Research,Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 35,
6700 AAWageningen, The Netherlands; jan.verhagen@wur.nl
* Correspondence: ruerd.ruben@wur.nl; Tel.: +31 (0)70-361-5624
Received: 30 November 2018; Accepted: 23 December 2018; Published: 31 December 2018 	

Abstract: Recent discussions on the results of food security programs devote key attention to complex
interactions between policy interventions and business innovation for improving nutrition outcomes.
This shift from linear approaches of food and nutrition security towards a more interlinked and nested
analysis of food systems dynamics has profound implications for the design and organization of
research and innovation processes. In this article we outline our experience with interdisciplinary and
interactive processes of food systems analysis at different scale levels, paying systematic attention to
three critical system interfaces: intersections with other systems, interactions within the food system,
and incentives for food system innovations (the so-called: 3I approach). We discuss the importance
of these interfaces for leveraging food system adaptation and managing food system transformation.
We also provide illustrative examples of the relevance of food systems analysis for the identification
of appropriate and effective programs for reinforcing the resilience, responsiveness and inclusiveness
of novel food and nutrition programs.
Keywords: food systems; interdisciplinary research; feedbacks & interlinkages; food policy;
3I Approach
1. Introduction
Research and policy on food security has long been dominated by questions regarding availability,
access and utilization. Major attention has been given to the identification of key factors that influence
the availability of food at different levels (i.e., individual, household, region, country), and the
likely implication of the growth of world population for food security [1]. Other studies focus on
understanding of processes that reinforce access to food and/or improve food utilization. Less attention
is devoted to the multidimensional nature of food security as influenced by interactions between
technical, economic, social and cultural factors. Moreover, the rather linear nature of many food
security analyses (focusing mainly on intensification of food production) is increasingly challenged by
more complex causal mechanisms that focus on competing goals, emerging system properties and
dynamic feedback mechanisms [2].
Food systems include all elements and activities related to the production, processing, distribution,
preparation and consumption of food, the market and institutional networks for their governance,
and the socio-economic and environmental outcomes of these activities [3–5]. Food systems analysis is
based on systematic appraisal of different underlying processes that influence food availability, access
and utilization, as well as a detailed analysis of the roles of different stakeholders involved, notably
the role of the consumer in nutrition-oriented food systems. It requires a thorough understanding
of the structure of a food system and the dynamics of food system changes over time and space in
Sustainability 2019, 11, 171; doi:10.3390/su11010171 1 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2019, 11, 171
relation to predefined societal, environmental or distributional goals. Important pillars for adequately
linking food system analysis to nutrition policy are [6–8]:
• Household targeting: focus on nutritional outcomes for different categories of consumers
(differentiated by wealth, gender and age) that have particular types of dietary preferences;
• Multiple delivery pathways of food: food access is satisfied through a combination of home
production, open markets purchase, supply by retail and supermarkets, and out of home
consumption from restaurants and food services;
• Interactive governance of material flows and information exchange networks between different
stakeholders and steering of decision-making processes by the food systems environment;
• Diet implication: effects on dietary intake and possible nutritional imbalances resulting from the
combination of diverse baskets of food products.
In this article we aim to assess the conceptual challenges and practical opportunities for analysing
the structure and performance of food systems, and we identify how food systems analysis could
deliver new and innovative insights for nutrition policy in developing countries. The main objectives
of the article are (a) to identify the strategic interfaces between different levels of the food system, and
(b) to assess food system responses to business innovations or policy interventions. Therefore, the
article responds both to the analytical challenge of understanding food systems performance as well
as the empirical challenge of identifying appropriate public and private actions for supporting food
systems change in line with societal goals. Moreover, we outline a framework to explore pathways
of food system adaptation and to assess the dynamics of food systems transition that goes beyond
the mere description of alternative options. This permits us to explicitly acknowledge trade-offs
between production and nutrition goals, and may support active engagement of public and private
stakeholders [9].
In a conceptual sense, food system analysis is usually conducted in a context where different goals
and ambitions are simultaneously pursued and trade-offs between system objectives are likely to occur.
Clear understanding of the interdependencies between different stakeholders (i.e., producers, traders,
processors, consumers, policy makers) is required for adequately tracing how activities (material and
human inputs) translate into desired outcomes (food security results and impact on nutrition). System
boundaries should be acknowledged to identify the feasible solutions space. Changes at one system
level might lead to undesirable results elsewhere in the food system, and improved knowledge on
these interactions could possibly give rise to other types of interventions.
In a practical sense, food systems analysis asks for support from a wide variety of disciplines
and also requires the involvement of multiple stakeholders. The willingness to cooperate is usually
based on beliefs and expectations that such a research process provides innovative outcomes and more
relevant insights. Moreover, the engagement of other (non-science) parties in the research process
enables better feedback and linkages to policy and practice [10]. This type of broad multi-stakeholder
cooperation and knowledge exchange is considered particularly important for understanding adaptive
processes that depend on interaction between technical and behavioral drivers of food system change.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2 we outline the analytical
framework for adequately understanding food system structure and dynamics, showing the
importance of interlinkages and feedback mechanisms. We briefly assess different methodological
strands within food systems analysis and indicate their prospects for food policy appraisal. Section 3
discusses the requirements for collaborative research around critical system interfaces that enable
the analysis of food systems performance. In Section 4 we translate this framework for food systems
analysis towards food and nutrition policy outcomes and identify some key areas where major
differences with traditional food security programs become visible. Finally, in Section 5 we present
a theory of change for analysing food systems dynamics to pursue different development trends,
and we summarize in Section 6 the advantages of our food systems approach for better dovetailing
2
Sustainability 2019, 11, 171
public and private actions and for capturing potential trade-offs between different societal goals in a
timely way.
2. Understanding Food Systems Performance
Most analyses of agricultural development start by addressing opportunities for increasing the
production of food either by increasing the cultivated areas (extensive growth) and/or through higher
yields (intensive growth). Much attention is usually given to agronomic research around the design
and extension of farming systems that have the capacity to generate higher returns from land. The latter
approach has been complemented by economic research focusing on the identification of appropriate
incentives and policies to support input use by local smallholders (seeds, fertilizer, credit) towards
higher returns from family labour and greater overall factor productivity (i.e., output generated by all
production factors together).
At the end of the 1990s, intensive international debates around the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs)—later on followed by ‘Zero Hunger’ challenge as part of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs)—asked for wider understanding of the different pathways towards food security. This
was not only because a single goal (food availability) was complemented with additional dimensions
(food access; food utilization; food safety), but also because aspects of time (stability) and space
(environmental resilience) increasingly required attention.
Food systems research took off when strategies for supporting food supply (production) and
food demand (consumption) began to be simultaneously analysed within an integrated analytical
framework. Trade-offs between these goals and tensions between instruments have been frequently
registered, for instance with respect to prices (i.e., high prices to support producers affect consumer
demand for food) and for supporting investments (i.e., low interest rates support input use but may
reduce employment). This becomes even more complicated when specific outcomes for well-defined
target groups (i.e., vulnerable households; people in remote areas; urban populations; women) are
pursued, or when agriculture is supposed to contribute to wider societal goals (nutrition, health,
employment, environment and climate).
Food systems analysis has undergone important changes over the last few decades. Three
different strands and related narratives can be distinguished: (a) descriptive analysis of the structure
of food systems with emphasis on the identification of key components [11–13]; (b) explorative
analysis of different policy options and opportunities for improving food systems performance [14–17],
and (c) interactive analysis of food system transitions and adaptive innovation strategies for creating
synergies and coherence between key agents [18–20]. While there is still limited communication
between these narratives—also related to the different academic disciplines underlying each of
them (i.e., agro-ecology, economics, nutrition and sociology)—it is urgently needed to reinforce
our understanding of feasible and effective strategies for supporting transitions towards healthier and
sustainable diets [21,22]. This calls for approaches that allow to bridge the gaps between hard and soft
systems analysis and that are capable of blending multi-level and multi-stakeholder dynamics [2].
Whereas many recent studies focus on the characteristics and features of food systems [23–25], we
consider it more useful to analyse which are the main dilemmas for making the food systems framework
useful for overcoming dilemmas in public policy and business practice [26]. Therefore, we introduce
a distinction between food system adaptation and food system transformation to highlight different
types of responses and interventions that underpin the design of food policies and innovations [27,28].
Adaptation of interactions between food system components may enable timely adjustment to key
bottlenecks, whereas external shocks call for major structural transformations. Such a dynamic
approach to food systems change can be particularly helpful to engage multiple stakeholders into
a common and coherent strategy that satisfies their long-term objectives [29].
Food systems analysis has been applied in two different arenas: for scaling public nutrition
policies and to support food business learning platforms and innovations networks. Therefore,
different leverage points need to be identified that generate enduring improvements in food systems
3
Sustainability 2019, 11, 171
performance. The relevance and effectiveness of this framework can be demonstrated by the emergence
of new forms of multi-stakeholder coalitions that support food system adaptation (see Section 4) and
the multi-level food systems transformations and responses to different types of external shocks
(see Section 5). The initial representation of food systems was based on a fairly linear understanding
of the linkages between food supply and demand activities (See Figure 1). It reflected an increasing
awareness that different stakeholders in the supply chain perform specific functions for providing
access to key inputs, processing primary outputs, and the marketing and distribution of food
towards final consumers. The original material and energy flow approach has been complemented
in more economic terms by analyses of the value chain [30] that looks at the transactions between
stakeholders and analyses the price and non-price properties of exchange conditions (trust, reliability,
frequency, etc.).
􀀯􀅶􀆉􀆵􀆚􀆐 Production 􀁗􀆌􀅽􀄐􀄞􀆐􀆐􀅝􀅶􀅐 􀁄􀄂􀆌􀅬􀄞􀆚􀅝􀅶􀅐 􀁚􀄞􀆚􀄂􀅝􀅯 􀀒􀅽􀅶􀆐􀆵􀅵􀆉􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶
Figure 1. Linear food supply system.
Whereas the supply/value chain framework improved the understanding about (horizontal)
interdependencies, it still provides little insight into system interactions and feedbacks. Also,
externalities for the society and the environment need more attention. The inclusion of waste recovery
and nutrient recycling into the model means that the system is better described with a circular
representation (see Figure 2). This also enables us to capture better the linkages between (intermediary)
inputs and outputs that are relevant for improving food system efficiency.
Production
Aggregation
Processing
Distribution Marketing
Consumption
Waste Recycling
Figure 2. Circular food system.
It was rapidly acknowledged that these linear and circular frameworks cannot do full justice
to the multiple levels and dynamic interlinkages between food production and nutrition, especially
because they disregard important spatial and temporal interactions [31]. Therefore, different efforts
were made to develop a more ‘nested’ approach to food systems as part of a set of wider sub-systems.
This includes both downstream linkages towards soil dynamics and their environmental and climate
effects, as well as upstream linkages within village and regional governance regimes and the linkages
of food to labour and capital markets that influence to a large extent the potential inclusiveness of
food systems.
The recognition of the importance of systems dynamics and feedback mechanisms incited a range
of complex multi-level graphic representations and related modelling exercises [32,33]. Food systems
4
Sustainability 2019, 11, 171
are increasingly visualised as networks that provide environmental services, enhance human welfare
and promote community-based socio-economic development, and thus contribute to sustainability,
resilience and equity [34]. Food choices and dietary outcomes are embedded in household/family
dynamics and village/regional conditions, whereas the availability and the supply and demand of
food is strongly governed by the food environment (see Figure 3).
Food Environment
Food Supply
Village Food Availability
Household Food
Preferencess
Individual
Diets
Figure 3. Nested food system.
This integrated framework of food systems has been embraced by major international fora, like by
the Committee onWorld Food Security (CFS), the High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and
Nutrition (HLPE) and the Global Panel on Agriculture and Food Systems for Nutrition (GLOPAN). It
is considered a useful framework for understanding major interactions at five different levels of the
food system:
• Physical food supply chains responding to behavioural preferences;
• Material food flows generating information on availability and prices;
• Price and non-price incentives that influence household demand;
• Resources (inputs) that are required for enabling reliable food supply;
• Policy and institutional environment that shape individual food choices.
Using a food systems approach for policy analysis has profound implications. This is not only
because multiple—sometimes conflicting—goals need to be considered, but also because several
external factors (demography, urbanization, infrastructure, economic growth, climate change) influence
to a great extent the internal food systems dynamics [35]. This calls for an in-depth analysis of potential
trade-offs and/or possible synergies between healthier diets, sustainable resource management,
resilient food systems and inclusive development [36]. Therefore, a combination of modelling tools
(scenario development) and lab-in-the field (behavioural experiments) approaches need to be used to
enhance our insights into the interactions and feedback mechanisms of food systems.
3. Interfaces for Food System Analysis
Based on our understanding of the structural features of food systems, we can now identify the
analytical framework to conduct empirical research on food systems dynamics. Given the complexity
of nested interactions between system levels and stakeholders, it is considered most useful to organize
research as part of a concrete intervention framework. This implies that we advocate for ‘Research
5
Sustainability 2019, 11, 171
in Development’, not as a sequential process but as an interactive approach to understand system
interfaces through direct stakeholder involvement.
Taking stock of the experiences from theWageningen Research knowledge base (KB) program
on global food and nutrition systems, we discuss three strategic interfaces—the so-called 3 I
framework—that are critical for identifying and understanding leverage points towards food
systems change:
a) Intersections with other non-food systems that influence the supply and demand of food;
b) Interactions between stakeholders that are engaged at different levels of the food system;
c) Incentives that influence the adaptive behaviour and response of food system stakeholders.
(a) Intersections with Other Systems
In the first place, any adequate analysis of the food systems dynamics requires a thorough
understanding of intersections with other systems. This refers both to horizontal linkages at space or
landscape level, as well as to vertical linkages with non-food systems (such as local labour markets or
international trade perspectives). It implies that the performance of the food system will be influenced
by several types of ‘external’ events that shape to a certain extent the internal dynamics of the food
system. Some critical events in other systems that are likely to occasion major food system shocks are:
• Population dynamics such as migration, leading to spatial shifts in food demand between rural
and urban populations;
• Economic (income) growth, that will influence food preferences towards demand for more
processed food and more food purchased at supermarkets;
• Technological development (i.e., ICT) that may open new, sometimes unforeseen, opportunities
for food production, distribution and sales;
• Climate change that may lead to spatial adjustment of appropriate production locations and/or
requirements for reorganization of the supply chain.
These external trends shape the opportunities for modifying food production and food
distribution, and also create new spaces for diversifying food demand. These external trends may
either reinforce or balance the changes in internal dynamics of the food systems. Urbanization and
economic growth tend to reinforce demand for more animal-based diets and processed food, whereas
technological change has the potential to improve the efficiency in food production and distribution.
Climate change, on the other hand, could modify the production potential and even lead to changes in
feasible production locations, and thus has direct effects on food supply and food prices.
(b) Interactions within the Food System
In the second place, interactions of activities exist between different stakeholders within the
food system. Food systems outcomes are shaped by activities at different system levels, and desired
outcomes sometimes require ‘remote’ interventions that generate results elsewhere in the system.
A food systems approach can be helpful to identify and promote activities that are beneficial to
desired outcomes, and should also consider alternative activities based on possible trade-offs with
other outcomes. Typical examples of such multi-level interactions that generate different outcomes at
different system levels are:
• Food waste reduction efforts made by primary producers tend to pay-off elsewhere in the supply
chain through improved margins for retailers (due to longer shelf life);
• Healthier dietary choices may be supported through direct consumer targeting (vouchers;
subsidies), but this could be done in a more cost-effective manner by reinforcing the food supply
environment (retail design, peer norms);
• Food safety assessments by consumers are largely based on trust that adequate risk management
practices are taken in upstream activities (processing, trade, storage).
6
Sustainability 2019, 11, 171
Adequate understanding of these interactions within the food system enables a more strategic
selection of focal points for influencing food system outcomes. Given these interdependencies
between stakeholders, healthier or more sustainable diets can be promoted by modifying exchange
conditions for food transactions. This refers both to price and non-price characteristics for supply and
demand of food that may lead to changes in production practices and/or consumers’ preferences.
Stakeholder cooperation could reinforce alliances between food system stakeholders (convergence)
but also conflicting outcomes are possible.
(c) Incentives towards Food Systems Stakeholders
In the third place, food system analysis asks for a clear understanding of the effectiveness of
incentives for stakeholders to change behaviour and to make choices or implement activities that are
needed to achieve the defined goals. Since food systems change can be supported by different types
of incentives (prices, taxes/subsidies, information, laws) that influence stakeholders into different
directions, it is quite possible that conflicting signals are given and, therefore, that not all system
outcomes can be reached simultaneously. Some of these common food system trade-offs refer to:
• Cooling during transport and storage of fast-moving perishable consumer goods such as fresh
vegetables and dairy (healthier food) is more demanding in terms of energy use (less sustainable);
• Healthier food choices are hard to influence with market incentives and depend to a large extent
on social norms;
• Investments in better waste management tend to increase overall market availability that leads to
lower producer prices, thus taking away the initial incentive for engagement.
For the identification of suitable incentives towards healthier diets and sustainable food systems, it
is important to understand direct response reactions from producers and consumers, but also spillover
effects to other food system stakeholders and the general equilibrium effects on market prices. These
secondary implications may either reinforce or counterbalance the original incentive structure and
thus determine to a great extent the overall system outcome.
This so-called 3I framework can be very useful to support information exchange between academic
disciplines and to foster active engagement of multiple stakeholders [37]. It is also relevant for steering
food system policy analysis where insights regarding technical feasibility and behavioural responses
need to be simultaneously considered. In addition, different food system goals (such as sustainability,
inclusiveness, fairness and resilience) may be compared with respect to their potential trade-offs.
Finally, adequate understanding of interactions between different system levels (food production,
value chains, food consumption) is helpful to identify the role of different stakeholders (public policy,
civic advocacy, business networks) for supporting food system innovations [38].
The food systems analysis thus considers some of the key variables and their major potential
interactions as underlying factors influencing dietary choices (by consumers) and allocative choices
(by producers and processors). It outlines clearly that effective policies for food system adaptation and
transformation require coordinated actions by different public and private stakeholders.
The food system approach might also be a useful framework to identify game changers for
improving systems performance. It enables better understanding of both positive and negative
feedbacks and considers behavioural interactions that shape the stakeholder’s responses to external
incentives or shocks. Systems change can thus be based on understanding thresholds and managing
the tipping points [39]. The latter are sometimes real regime shifts: large, often abrupt and
non-linear changes in food systems behaviour, usually triggered by conflicts between social and
environmental factors (poverty traps; ecological shocks) that directly affect people’s livelihoods [40].
This understanding is important to identify possible instruments and innovations that are proposed to
support food system improvements.
7
Sustainability 2019, 11, 171
4. New Insights on Food Systems Performance
Food systems analysis is expected to deliver new insights for a more accurate process of public
policy formulation and private sector investment appraisal. It is increasingly seen as a suitable way to
improve food systems’ outcomes (in terms of inclusiveness and sustainability) in order to deal with
competing priorities (healthy and sustainable diets) and to harmonize complex interfaces that exist
between the stakeholders within food systems [41–43].
Therefore, it is useful to ask the question: what differences does it make to rely on food systems
analysis for the selection of public policy and private investment priorities, and which instruments
and incentives can be used to support these objectives? We focus on five food systems levels that are
of critical importance for internal interaction, and distinguish between different types of interventions
(or leverage points [44]) that focus on (a) supply-led production logic and (b) demand-led food
consumption logic (see Table 1). For each approach we also indicate the most likely stakeholder
coalition to harmonize multi-level policy interventions.
Table 1. Interventions to improve food system performance.
Leverage Point Conventional Logic Food System Logic Multi-Stakeholder
Coalition
Production systems
(a) Focus on improving
inputs (seed, fertilizers)
and training in good
agricultural practices
(GAP) for yield
improvements, shifting
towards more
commercial agriculture
(b) Focus on (local and
external) market demand
that generates incentives to
pull-in farm-level
investments and reinforce
farmers’ bargaining position
(a) Producer-based with
(private and public)
support services
(b) Marketing
cooperatives and
contract farming
Value chains
(a) Income generation
and value added
generation by upgrading
and sales with private
processors and traders
networks
(b) Reinforce local
processing and strengthen
(female) bargaining to
generate higher value added
and improve
intra-household welfare
(a) Midstream input
providers and traders
(b) Farmer organization
& trade contracts
Distribution networks
(a) Guarantee stable
market outlets through
guaranteed quality and
delivery loyalty
(b) Develop long-term
upstream/downstream trust
relationships and stable
revenue streams
(a) Trader-oriented
contracts
(b) Producer-trader
interface
Household livelihoods
(a) Support to higher
land productivity and
income generation
trough specialisation
with higher farm
employment
(b) Support to higher labour
productivity with education
and risk reduction through
(on/off farm) activity
diversification
(a) Public land titling
and private input
providers
(b) Village networks and
civic agencies
Food choices
(a) Attention to food
security through supply
and stable access to
sufficient, affordable
(and safe) food
(b) Attention for informed
choices for healthy and
varied diets through home
production and market
purchase
(a) Public infrastructure
and private retail
(b) Food environment
and behavioural change
communication (NGOs)
Source: author’s elaboration.
Programs that focus on improving farm production systems usually devote major attention to
the input side (better seeds and fertilizers to support the adoption of improved agricultural practices)
enabling producers to earn higher incomes through engagement in commercial farming. Better
results might be achieved if due attention is also given to incentives from the market environment
(e.g., de-risking) that incite farmers to make the necessary investments and reinforce their bargaining
position in major markets. The latter interventions are likely to deliver better results in terms of
8
Sustainability 2019, 11, 171
household consumption and dietary intake that are strongly driven by certainty on revenue streams
and risk diversification from engagement in different market outlets.
Interventions at the level of value chains are critically important to guarantee that farmers can
reap the product of their investment efforts. In practice, however, a large proportion of the generated
value added accrues to upstream chain actors. In addition to value chain integration and upgrading,
it is important to guarantee that women receive a fair share of the generated revenues. This is
a key condition to guarantee that higher revenues are translated into better nutrition and improved
household welfare [45].
The organization of food distribution networks also influences dietary outcomes. Traditional
marketing programs focus on reaching scale, reinforcing quality and strengthening loyalty between
producers and processors (avoiding free riding and sides sales). Food systems approaches recognize
also the importance of social and cultural interfaces and thus support trust and loyalty as initial
conditions that enable smallholders to make farm-level investments for improved production systems.
In a similar vein, many programs that focus on household livelihoods tend to search for higher
land productivity, usually through a higher degree of activity specialization and more on-farm
employment. However, rural households look to optimize utility and thus search for higher labour
productivity, also off-farm and outside agriculture (i.e., more revenues and higher leisure), and benefit
particularly from engagement into risk-reducing activities. To enable smallholders’ adoption of
high-yielding activities, social and commercial networks are of vital importance.
Finally, improving individual food choices requires first of all better availability of (different types
of) food and stable access to affordable, safe and healthy food items. While this is a necessary condition
for supporting food choice, it is certainly not a sufficient condition for realizing such an outcome.
Therefore, demand-side interventions are also required that reinforce the food environment and
provide information and incentives to individuals and households for improving behavioural choices.
In summary, the food system approach provides an analytical framework that gives new insights
in intervention pathways which enrich the ‘menu of opportunities’ for linking key food policy
instruments and for involving different stakeholders. This will enable a better understanding of
the interactions between the material and behavioural drivers of food systems change that are vital for
linking food production, exchange and consumption, to identify effective food governance mechanisms
and to assist stakeholders to make better informed choices on resource allocation and investment.
The involvement of different (public, private and civic) stakeholders is required to guarantee
that supply and demand-side requirements of food systems are balanced. Moreover, public support
programs need to be embedded into business drivers for innovation to safeguard food systems
responsiveness. These new insights are generated by using systematically the analytical food
systems lens that identifies more effective pathways towards food systems transformation in line with
stakeholders’ perceptions and societal development goals.
5. Drivers for Food System Change
The usefulness of food systems analysis can also be assessed within a more dynamic framework
by looking at how food systems respond to some major external drivers of change (urbanization;
economic growth; climate change; information and communication technology (ICT) connectivity).
This analysis of pathways for food system transformation is based on understanding of how external
change may lead to adjustments within the food system, and what type of adaptations are likely to take
place in different layers (i.e., individual, household, village, region and value chain) of the food system
as outlined in Figure 3 [15,18]. Food system responses are thus of critical importance to guarantee
that trade-offs between conflicting aims can be reconciled and competing claims on resources are
overcome [46,47].
We distinguish three areas of responses to major trends that together determine the adaptive
capacity of food systems: resilience capacity, inclusiveness, and sustainability (see Table 2). As shown
in Table 2, the suggested responses to external shocks are not isolated and limited to particular stages in
9
Sustainability 2019, 11, 171
the food supply chain, but make use of the interlinkages and feedback within the nested food system.
Looking at intersections with other systems, interactions within the food system, and incentives
towards food system stakeholders leads to other types of responses and invites different types of
interventions (see also Section 3) that might be overlooked in more conventional food chain and
network analysis.
Table 2. Examples of food systems responses to major trends.
Outcome Areas Change
Drivers Resilience Inclusiveness Sustainability
Urbanisation and
Migration
Regular supply, loss reduction
and stable prices of perishable
food (drying, cooling,
packaging) through consumer
market information (i.e.,
mobile app)
Access to healthy (fresh)
affordable food in (poor)
neighbourhoods with
high dietary gaps (i.e.,
open markets, home
delivery)
Food supply chains
based on transparent &
responsive food
environment (grading;
food certification, etc.)
Economic Growth
Infrastructure investments to
enhance food system
adaptation (i.e., smart
information and
communication technology
(ICT) solutions)
Pro-poor targeting of
public and private
investments and
demand-led food
delivery options
(consumer coops)
Guiding dietary change
in home and
out-of-home
consumption
(convenient & healthy
diets)
Climate Change
Farmer training and inputs
finance for mitigation and
adaptation
De-risking of
smallholder finance (i.e.,
pre-finance mechanisms)
Early investments to
anticipate shifts in
appropriate production
areas and techniques
Connectivity
Informed choice on market
outlets (street food, corner
shop, supermarket)
Dietary knowledge
through behavioural
change practices (i.e.,
school meals)
Providing product
information (labels) and
through public
campaigns
Source: author’s elaboration.
Important external food systems challenges are related to rapid migration towards (peri-)urban
settlements that may increase the likelihood of food losses and waste in longer-distance food chains,
require more storage and processing facilities, and lead to changes in diets (more processed foods)
and shifts in market outlets (supermarkets, convenience shops and restaurants) that might affect
inclusiveness and resilience. Economic growth and rising incomes tend to modify the food demand of
the middle classes towards convenience consumption, whereas poorer population segments search for
protection against price fluctuation (e.g., through affiliation to consumer cooperatives). Food system
responses to climate change require either fixed investments for adaptation of production systems
(provided by international banks) and/or climate-smart finance for climate mitigation purposes
(provided by NGOs). Finally, improved connectedness through ICT systems enables consumers to
make more informed food choices and could eventually support demand-led shifts in consumer
behaviour towards more sustainable products and healthier diets.
Identifying such cross-cutting solutions to enhance inclusive, responsive and resilient food
systems performance requires concerted efforts by interdisciplinary teams that are committed to
engage in an informed dialogue with food system stakeholders. Finding out-of-the-box alternatives
implies that most attention should be given to an understanding of the food system interlinkages and
feedbacks, and less to each of the separate components.
The integration of such transdisciplinary teams is usually built on joint training and knowledge
exchange, strong commitment to learning and innovation, transparent information exchange and
common understanding of the shared purpose that can only be reached through committed
multi-stakeholder collaboration. Important new insights on suitable policy interventions and business
innovations in response to external shocks tend to be generated at the interface between explorative
10
Sustainability 2019, 11, 171
analysis (inventory of change options) and interactive appraisal (portfolio of change pathways) that
enable to overcome critical food system bottlenecks.
Therefore, it is of critical importance that food systems analysis is undertaken as part of a wider
agenda of agrarian and social transformation. While adjustments of individual components could
certainly be helpful to solve specific local problems, they do not change the overall dynamics of food
systems interactions [48]. Moreover, identifying tools for creating synergies between food systems
goals (i.e., healthy and sustainable food) can be better addressed when nested food system levels are
simultaneously considered and payoffs to each of the stakeholders can be clearly acknowledged.
6. Conclusions and Outlook
Policies for influencing food systems’ performance need to be based on an adequate understanding
of both the relationships between key stakeholders as well as the interactions with the external
environment. Many different instruments can be used to support safe and healthier food choices and
to improve dietary outcomes, but their effectiveness cannot be generally acknowledged [49]. This is
primarily due to the wide diversity in strategic responses amongst food system stakeholders and the
dynamic feedbacks between different food system levels.
We outlined in this article some major analytical challenges for describing the structural
components of food systems and for analysing opportunities for food systems change empirically.
Given the complex interactions between different system levels and the strategic responses of each of
the stakeholders, it is difficult to offer adequate foresight on possible pathways towards food systems
transition [50]. Better understanding of (internal) leverage points and (external) drivers of system
change, as well as timely identification of potential trade-offs between food system goals permits us to
prioritize key policy interventions as enablers for business innovation practices.
Important insights from food systems analysis indicate that solutions to major food and nutrition
challenges can be found in other parts of the system, sometimes far from the area where the problem
became manifest. This may lead to another type of interventions that strategically rely on intersections
with other systems, the interactions within the food system, or the incentives towards stakeholders,
in order to identify actions that can improve food systems performance and ultimately support
food systems transformation. Improving insights in dynamic adjustments pathways and strategic
stakeholder responses can be very helpful for creating public–private coalitions that enable food
systems change.
Based on experiences in food systems research and the parallel adjustment in leading paradigms
for operational food policy analysis, we can identify three critical conditions that should be considered
for an interactive analysis of food system transitions:
1. Multi-level interdependencies between food system activities permit focused actions towards
leverage points that may result in coherent outcomes at aggregate system level;
2. Multiple goals optimization that are based on adaptive innovation practices and learning loops
towards scaling of food systems’ change strategies;
3. Multiple stakeholder activities that together are able to create synergies and multipliers that
permit the bridging of trade-offs.
Therefore, it is of paramount importance to develop analytical tools that enable the assessment
of the likely outcomes of nutrition-oriented public policies and investment priorities to evaluate
empirically the effectiveness of different (sets of) instruments for satisfying key stakeholders’ goals and
for reaching strategic development objectives. Given the diverse and multi-level responses to policy
incentives and simultaneously occurring changes in external conditions, broad coalitions between
different (public and private/civic) stakeholders are necessary to overcome possible trade-offs.
Author Contributions: R.R.: first author, coordinator KB-22 theme “Global food and nutrition security” and
CGIAR-A4NH Management Committee member. J.V., C.P.: coordinator KB-22 theme “Global food and nutrition
security,Wageningen Research.
11
Sustainability 2019, 11, 171
Funding: This research received was funded by the Dutch Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality,
grant number KB-22.
Acknowledgments: The authors wish to thank the CGIAR-A4NH Flagship “Food Systems for Healthier Diets”
funded by the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and the KB-22 theme “Global food and nutrition security” of
Wageningen University and Research funded by the Dutch Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality for
funding this study conducted under the Food Systems umbrella.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Van Ittersum, M.K.; Van Bussel, L.G.; Wolf, J.; Grassini, P.; Van Wart, J.; Guilpart, N.; Claessens, L.; de
Groot, H.;Wiebe, K.; Mason-D’Croz, D. Can sub-saharan africa feed itself? Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016,
113, 14964–14969. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Foran, T.; Butler, J.R.;Williams, L.J.;Wanjura,W.J.; Hall, A.; Carter, L.; Carberry, P.S. Taking complexity in
food systems seriously: An interdisciplinary analysis. World Dev. 2014, 61, 85–101. [CrossRef]
3. Goodman, D.; DuPuis, E.M.; Goodman, M.K. Alternative Food Networks: Knowledge, Practice, and Politics;
Routledge: Abingdon, UK, 2012.
4. Morley, A.; Marsden, T. Current food questions and their scholarly challenges: Creating and framing
a sustainable food paradigm. In Sustainable Food Systems; Routledge: Abingdon, UK, 2014; pp. 17–45.
5. Pitt, H.; Jones, M. Scaling up and out as a pathway for food system transitions. Sustainability 2016, 8, 1025.
[CrossRef]
6. Grant, M. A food systems approach for food and nutrition security. Sight Life 2015, 29, 87–90.
7. Herforth, A.; Ahmed, S. The food environment, its effects on dietary consumption, and potential for
measurement within agriculture-nutrition interventions. Food Secur. 2015, 7, 505–520. [CrossRef]
8. Tschirley, D.; Haggblade, S.; Reardon, T. Africa’s emerging food system transformation. In Global Center for
Food Systems Innovation; White Paper; Michigan State University: East Lansing, MI, USA, 2013.
9. Dunning, R.; Bloom, J.D.; Creamer, N. The local food movement, public-private partnerships, and food
system resiliency. J. Environ. Stud. Sci. Springer Assoc. Environ. Stud. Sci. 2015, 5, 661–670. [CrossRef]
10. Kjellberg, A.; Sohlenius, G. Principles of multidisciplinary cooperation in research, especially behavioural
science and manufacturing. CIRP Ann. 1993, 42, 541–543. [CrossRef]
11. Scott, P. Global panel on agriculture and food systems for nutrition: Food systems and diets: Facing the
challenges of the 21st century. Food Secur. Sci. Sociol. Econ. Food Prod. Access Food 2017, 9, 653–654. [CrossRef]
12. Ingram, J. A food systems approach to researching food security and its interactions with global
environmental change. Food Secur. 2011, 3, 417–431. [CrossRef]
13. Westhoek, H.; Ingram, J.; Van Berkum, S.; Özay, L.; Hajer, M. Food systems and natural resources. In
A Report of the Working Group on Food Systems of the International Resource Panel; United Nations Environment
Programme: Paris, France, 2016.
14. Van Berkum, S.; Dengerink, J.; Ruben, R. The Food Systems Approach: Sustainable Solutions for a Sufficient Supply
of Healthy Food;Wageningen Economic Research: Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2018.
15. Allen, T.; Prosperi, P. Modeling sustainable food systems. Environ. Manag. 2016, 57, 956–975. [CrossRef]
16. Shaping the Future of Global Food Systems: A Scenarios Analysis; World Economic Forum: Cologny,
Switzerland, 2017.
17. Caron, P.; y de Loma-Osorio, G.F.; Nabarro, D.; Hainzelin, E.; Guillou, M.; Andersen, I.; Arnold, T.;
Astralaga, M.; Beukeboom, M.; Bickersteth, S. Food systems for sustainable development: Proposals for
a profound four-part transformation. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 2018, 38, 41. [CrossRef]
18. Bui, S.; Cardona, A.; Lamine, C.; Cerf, M. Sustainability transitions: Insights on processes of niche-regime
interaction and regime reconfiguration in agri-food systems. J. Rural Stud. 2016, 48, 92–103. [CrossRef]
19. De Schutter, O. The political economy of food systems reform. Eur. Rev. Agric. Econ. 2017, 44, 705–731.
[CrossRef]
20. Meadows, D. Places to intervene in a system. Whole Earth 1997, 91, 78–84.
21. Béné, C.; Oosterveer, P.; Lamotte, L.; Brouwer, I.D.; de Haan, S.; Prager, S.D.; Talsma, E.F.; Khoury, C.K.
When food systems meet sustainability–current narratives and implications for actions. World Dev. 2019, 113,
116–130. [CrossRef]
12
Sustainability 2019, 11, 171
22. Fresco, L.O.; Ruben, R.; Herens, M. Challenges and perspectives for supporting sustainable and inclusive
food systems. GREAT Insights Magazine, 2017; 13–15.
23. Eakin, H.; Connors, J.P.; Wharton, C.; Bertmann, F.; Xiong, A.; Stoltzfus, J. Identifying attributes of food
system sustainability: Emerging themes and consensus. Agric. Hum.Values 2016, 34, 57–773. [CrossRef]
24. Sundaram, J. Tackling the nutrition challenge: A food systems approach. J. Dev. 2014, 2, 141. [CrossRef]
25. Gladek, E.; Fraser, M.; Roemers, G.; Sabag Muñoz, O.; Kennedy, E.; Hirsch, P. The Global Food System:
An Analysis; Metabolic: Zeist, The Netherlands, 2016; p. 180.
26. Gillespie, S.; van den Bold, M. Agriculture, Food Systems, and Nutrition: Meeting the Challenge.
2017. Available online: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/gch2.201600002 (accessed on 05
December 2017).
27. Lang, T. Food security and food sustainability: Reformulating the debate. Geogr. J. 2012, 178, 313–332.
[CrossRef]
28. Miller, D.;Welch, R.M. Food system strategies for preventing micronutrient malnutrition. Food Policy 2013,
42, 115–128. [CrossRef]
29. Hawkes, C. Policy coherence across the food system for nutrition: From challenge to opportunity. GREAT
Insights Mag. 2017, 6. Available online: https://ecdpm.org/great-insights/sustainable-food-systems/policycoherence-
across-food-system-nutrition-challenge-opportunity/ (accessed on 12 August 2018).
30. Gereffi, G.; Fernandez-Stark, K. Global Value Chain Analysis: A Primer; Duke University: Durham, NC,
USA, 2016.
31. Hunt, K.P. A nested approach to the right to food: Food security, gender violence, and human rights. J. Agric.
Food Syst. Commun. Dev. 2016, 7, 141–143. [CrossRef]
32. Vandermeer, J.; Aga, A.; Allgeier, J.E.; Badgley, C.; Baucom, R.; Blesh, J.; Shapiro, L.F.; Jones, A.D.;
Hoey, L.; Perfecto, I. Feeding prometheus: An interdisciplinary approach for solving the global food
crisis. Front. Sustain. Food Syst. 2018, 2, 39. [CrossRef]
33. Miles, A.; DeLonge, M.S.; Carlisle, L. Triggering a positive research and policy feedback cycle to support
a transition to agroecology and sustainable food systems. Agroecol. Sustain. Food Syst. 2017, 41, 855–879.
[CrossRef]
34. Haddad, L.; Hawkes, C.;Waage, J.;Webb, P.; Godfray, C.; Toulmin, C. Food Systems and Diets: Facing the
Challenges of the 21st Century; 2016. Available online: http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/19323/ (accessed on 24
May 2018).
35. Tendall, D.; Joerin, J.; Kopainsky, B.; Edwards, P.; Shreck, A.; Le, Q.; Krütli, P.; Grant, M.; Six, J. Food system
resilience: Defining the concept. Glob. Food Secur. 2015, 6, 17–23. [CrossRef]
36. Fresco, L.O. Challenges for food system adaptation today and tomorrow. Environ. Sci. Policy 2009, 12,
378–385. [CrossRef]
37. Drewnowski, A.; Team, T.E.I. The Chicago consensus on sustainable food systems science. Front. Nutr. 2017,
4, 74. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Kim, D.; Anderson, V. System Archetype Basics, from Story to Structure; Pegasus communication. Inc.: Waltham,
MA, USA, 1998.
39. Benton, T.; Fairweather, D.; Graves, A.; Harris, J.; Jones, A.; Lenton, T.; Norman, R.; O’Riordan, T.; Pope, E.;
Tiffin, R. Environmental Tipping Points and Food System Dynamics; Global Food Security: Swindon, UK, 2017.
40. Biggs, R.; Carpenter, S.R.; Brock, W.A. Turning back from the brink: Detecting an impending regime shift in
time to avert it. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2009, 106, 826–831. [CrossRef]
41. Ericksen, P.; Stewart, B.; Dixon, J.; Barling, D.; Loring, P.; Anderson, M.; Ingram, J. The value of a food system
approach. Food Secur. Glob. Environ. Change 2010, 25, 24–25.
42. Ingram, J.; Ericksen, P.; Liverman, D. Food Security and Global Environmental Change; Routledge: Abingdon,
UK, 2012.
43. Garnett, T. Three perspectives on sustainable food security: Efficiency, demand restraint, food system
transformation. What role for lca. J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 30, 1e9.
44. West, P.C.; Gerber, J.S.; Engstrom, P.M.; Mueller, N.D.; Brauman, K.A.; Carlson, K.M.; Cassidy, E.S.;
Johnston, M.; MacDonald, G.K.; Ray, D.K. Leverage points for improving global food security and the
environment. Science 2014, 345, 325–328. [CrossRef]
45. Brown, L.; Deshpande, C.; Hill, C.; Lambrou, Y.; Laudazi, M.; Ragasa, C. Module 1: Gender and food
security. In Gender and Agriculture Sourcebook: Investing in Women as Drivers of Agricultural Growth; 2009;
13
Sustainability 2019, 11, 171
Available online: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTGENAGRLIVSOUBOOK/Resources/Module1.
pdf (accessed on 12 October 2018).
46. Garnett, T.; Godfray, C.H. Sustainable Intensification in Agriculture. Navigating a Course through Competing Food
System Priorities; University of Oxford Programme on the Future of Food, University of Oxford: Oxford,
UK, 2012.
47. Lang, T.; Barling, D. Nutrition and sustainability: An emerging food policy discourse. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 2013,
72, 1–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Freedgood, J.; Pierce-Quiñonez, M.; Meter, K. Emerging assessment tools to inform food system planning.
J. Agric. Food Syst. Commun. Dev. 2016, 2, 83–104. [CrossRef]
49. Pinstrup-Andersen, P.; Watson, D.D., II. Food Policy for Developing Countries: The Role of Government in Global,
National, and Local Food Systems; Cornell University Press: Ithaca, NY, USA, 2011.
50. Thompson, J.; Millstone, E.; Scoones, I.; Ely, A.; Marshall, F.; Shah, E.; Stagl, S.; Wilkinson, J. Agri-Food System
Dynamics: Pathways to Sustainability in an Era of Uncertainty. 2007. Available online: https://www.ids.ac.uk/
files/agriculture.pdf (accessed on 8 April 2016).
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
14
sustainability
Article
Does Agricultural Commercialization Affect Food
Security: The Case of Crop-Producing Households in
the Regions of Post-Reform Vietnam?
Vincent Linderhof *, Valerie Janssen and Thom Achterbosch
Wageningen Economic Research, Prinses Beatrixlaan 582-528, 2595 BM The Hague, The Netherlands;
valerie.janssen@wur.nl (V.J.); thom.achterbosch@wur.nl (T.A.)
* Correspondence: vincent.linderhof@wur.nl; Tel.: +31-70-335-8396
Received: 31 December 2018; Accepted: 20 February 2019; Published: 27 February 2019
	

Abstract: Agricultural commercialization remains a widely pursued approach in development
projects to improve food security in low-income countries, although there is no clear scientific
evidence for it. This study examines the impact of agricultural commercialization on the food security
status of crop-producing households in the regions of Vietnam in the 1990s. We used the food system
framework including output and input markets. We explore three indicators of commercialization:
Cash crop production share (CCPS), crop output market participation share (COMPS), and crop input
market participation share (CIMPS) based on fertilizer use. For food security, we looked at caloric
intake and dietary diversity (Food Variety Score). We use a balanced panel data sample from the
Vietnam Living Standards Survey (VLSS) of 1992/93 and 1997/98. We apply four specifications for
all combinations of commercialization indicators and food security indicators for seven regions: OLS
1992/93, OLS 1997/98, pooled sample, and difference estimator. The results show that the effect of
commercialization on food security is widely heterogeneous. It depends upon the commercialization
indicator and the region in Vietnam. In general, there is no clear evidence for the direction of
commercialization on either caloric intake or dietary diversity; however, it is clear that the impacts
are generally more positive for southern regions than for northern regions of Vietnam.
Keywords: commercialization; Vietnam; food system; fertilizer use; caloric intake; dietary diversity
Vietnam Living Standards Survey (VLSS)
1. Introduction
Commercialization has been presented as a way out of poverty and as a way to improve food
security for poor farming households in low-income countries since the 1980s [1]. So far, the promotion
of commercialization has been targeted at the agricultural outputs of poor farming households. There
are two reasons to re-examine this relationship. Firstly, commercialization should be regarded from a
food-system perspective, which means that different elements of the food system, as defined in earlier
studies [2], can contribute to commercialization. From the farmer perspective, commercialization is not
limited to increased market outputs or the production of cash crops. It can also refer to the purchasing
of fertilizer or the hiring of labor, for instance. Secondly, not all low- and middle-income countries
have available detailed surveys with which the impact of commercialization on farming households
can be analyzed. For instance, Myanmar is a centrally planned economy that is opening up to a
more market-oriented economy. However, Myanmar lacks reliable surveys for analyzing the impacts
of commercialization on poverty and food security. Therefore, we sought a country with similar
characteristics, which has experienced political and economic transition, and which has available
household surveys to analyze the impact of commercialization on food security. Therefore, we chose to
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263; doi:10.3390/su11051263 15 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
look at the impact of commercialization on food security in Vietnam in the 1990s, as it reflects a similar
degree of political and economic change to that which Myanmar is experiencing now. Therefore, this
study will focus on the impact of commercialization from a food-system perspective on food security
of farming households in Vietnam in the 1990s.
In the 1990s, Vietnam experienced high levels of economic growth [3] caused by a set of economic
reforms, the so-called doi moi [4]. These reforms started around 1986 and focused on transforming
the centrally planned economy gradually towards a more market-oriented system [5]. At the same
time, Vietnam achieved a significant reduction in poverty [3]. The share of the population living in
poverty dropped from 58% in 1993 to 37% in 1998 [6], while the share of undernourishment declined
from 45.6% to 35.4% between 1991 and 1995 [6]. The privatization of the agricultural sector was one of
the key elements of the doi moi. Farm households were, from that moment onwards, allowed to make
their own decisions on the allocation of land, the type of crops produced, and whether or not they
sell their produce at markets. Additionally, the market prices of crops and inputs were liberalized [5],
and collective farms were privatized—similar to that observed in China a couple of years earlier [4].
In 1996, ten years after the doi moi started, the agricultural sector was still employing 70% of the
population [6].
There are studies that analyzed the impact of economic reforms and trade liberalization on
agriculture and the income distribution in rural Vietnam [7,8]. However, it is still unclear how
economic prosperity, caused by these political and economic changes, has affected food security in this
period of poverty in Vietnam. In the literature on commercialization and food security, there has been
limited empirical research on the topic despite much discussion on the topic in the literature in the
1980s and 1990s [9]. Most empirical studies found a positive effect of commercialization on income,
but only a marginal effect on nutrition or food security [9]. Most studies were applied in the African
context, with hardly any examples for the South East Asia region published.
This study will analyze the impact of commercialization on food security from a food system’s
perspective. In particular, we will analyze the relationship between indicators of commercialization and
food security using three commercialization indicators, namely, the share of cash crops in production,
the share of market participation, and share of inputs used from the market. For food security, we
distinguish two indicators, namely caloric intake and the Food Variety Score (FVS). As we explore the
relationship between the commercialization of agriculture and food security, we will solely consider
farm households involved in crop production in our analysis. Moreover, we only include farm
households for which we have two observations in time so that we can explore the change over time
at the farm household level. As the food systems differ across the seven administrative regions [10],
we explore the relationships for each of the seven regions separately.
The set of explanatory variables include commercialization, socio-economic, and farm
characteristics. Using panel data from the Vietnam Living Standards Survey (VLSS) for 1992–1993 and
1997-1998, we explore different model specifications for explaining food security such as an Ordinary
Least Squared (OLS) model for the individual cross-sectional data sets of 1992/93 and 1997/98, an OLS
for the pooled sample of two data sets, and a fixed effects (FE) difference estimator.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses the literature on commercialization and
the impact on income and food security of smallholder farmers. Section 3 presents the methodology,
and Section 3 discusses the data of the VLSS in more detail. Section 4 examines the results and, finally,
Section 4 presents the conclusions of the study and provides further discussion.
2. Literature and Methodology
2.1. Literature Review
Agriculture in low-income countries is known to be a crucial provider of income, livelihoods,
and environmental services [11]. Moreover, agriculture and its commercialization are seen as
particularly promising ways out of poverty for poor farming households in low-income countries [1].
In theory, specialization and commercialization of agriculture are much more efficient than subsistence
16
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
farming. Specialization and commercialization of agriculture can improve the productivity and
competitiveness of smallholder farmers. Gains in income could occur through comparative advantages,
economies of scale, and increased productivity caused by social learning effects [12]. In addition,
the improved agricultural productivity reduces the amount of labor required on farms, which
implies mobility of labor from agriculture towards other sectors of the economy [12]. However,
the commercialization of agriculture can also lead to a decline in crop production diversity at the
farm household level [13]. This would mean that households can become less self-sufficient and more
dependent on local food markets. In regions where markets are not well-integrated, volatile market
prices of crops and inputs, inefficient marketing institutions, and poor infrastructure pose risks to
household income [14,15]. Moreover, due to the lack of access to credit, households are unable to
mitigate these risks [14]. In such regions, subsistence farming serves as a kind of insurance against the
risks and costs of the market [1].
In order to achieve improved agricultural productivity, attention should be given to increasing
access to assets and diversifying income sources other than from agriculture [11]. Since we are
focusing on the impact of commercialization on food security of farming households, other impacts of
commercialization are beyond the scope of this study.
Farming households have different ways in which they can improve their food security status.
We adopt the framework which distinguishes three different pathways [16], see Figure 1. The market
pathway represents the most direct impact of commercialization of agriculture from an output
perspective, i.e., higher quantities of agricultural commodities sold at the market. However,
commercialization of agriculture might also affect the own-production pathway, as it implies changes
in input use which affect agricultural productivity, and potentially results in higher own production.
􀀯􀅶􀆉􀆵􀆚􀆐􀀃􀄂􀅶􀄚􀀃􀅝􀅶􀅶􀅽􀇀􀄂􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶
􀀒􀆌􀄞􀄚􀅝􀆚
􀁤􀄞􀄐􀅚􀅶􀅽􀅯􀅽􀅐􀇇􀍗􀀃
􀄂􀅐􀆌􀅝􀄐􀆵􀅯􀆚􀆵􀆌􀄂􀅯􀀃􀆉􀆌􀅽􀄚􀆵􀄐􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀀃
􀆉􀆌􀄂􀄐􀆚􀅝􀄐􀄞􀆐􀀃􀄨􀅽􀆌􀀃􀄞􀇆􀄂􀅵􀆉􀅯􀄞􀀃
􀄐􀆌􀅽􀆉􀀃􀄨􀄞􀆌􀆚􀅝􀅯􀄂􀆐􀄂􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀀃􀅽􀆌􀀃
􀅯􀅝􀇀􀄞􀆐􀆚􀅽􀄐􀅬􀀃􀄨􀄞􀄞􀄚􀅝􀅶􀅐
􀁗􀆌􀅝􀅵􀄂􀅝􀆌􀇇􀀃􀄂􀅐􀆌􀅝􀄐􀆵􀅯􀆚􀆵􀆌􀄂􀅯􀀃
􀆉􀆌􀅽􀄚􀆵􀄐􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶
􀁙􀆵􀄂􀅶􀆚􀅝􀆚􀇇
􀁙􀆵􀄂􀅯􀅝􀆚􀇇􀀃
􀀘􀅝􀇀􀄞􀆌􀆐􀅝􀆚􀇇
􀀦􀄂􀆌􀅵􀀃􀅐􀄂􀆚􀄞􀀃􀆉􀆌􀅝􀄐􀄞
􀁋􀇁􀅶􀍲􀆉􀆌􀅽􀄚􀆵􀄐􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀀃􀆉􀄂􀆚􀅚􀇁􀄂􀇇
􀁞􀆚􀅽􀆌􀄂􀅐􀄞􀀃􀀃􀍲􀀃􀁋􀇁􀅶􀀃􀆉􀆌􀅽􀄚􀆵􀄐􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀀃􀄨􀅽􀆌􀀃
􀄐􀅽􀅶􀆐􀆵􀅵􀆉􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶
􀀄􀅐􀆌􀅝􀄐􀆵􀅯􀆚􀆵􀆌􀄂􀅯􀍲􀄏􀄂􀆐􀄞􀄚􀀃􀅚􀅽􀆵􀆐􀄞􀅚􀅽􀅯􀄚􀀃
􀅝􀅶􀄐􀅽􀅵􀄞
􀁴􀄂􀅐􀄞􀆐
􀁅􀅽􀅶􀍲􀄨􀄂􀆌􀅵􀀃􀅝􀅶􀄐􀅽􀅵􀄞􀀃􀆉􀄂􀆚􀅚􀇁􀄂􀇇
􀁄􀄂􀆌􀅬􀄞􀆚􀀃􀁗􀄂􀆚􀅚􀇁􀄂􀇇􀀃􀍾􀄚􀅽􀅵􀄞􀆐􀆚􀅝􀄐􀀃􀄂􀅶􀄚􀀃
􀅝􀅶􀆚􀄞􀆌􀅶􀄂􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀄂􀅯􀍿
􀀾􀅽􀄐􀄂􀅯􀀃􀄨􀅽􀅽􀄚􀀃
􀄞􀅶􀇀􀅝􀆌􀅽􀅶􀅵􀄞􀅶􀆚
􀀦􀅽􀅽􀄚􀀃􀆉􀆌􀅝􀄐􀄞
􀀄􀇀􀄂􀅝􀅯􀄂􀄏􀅝􀅯􀅝􀆚􀇇
􀀘􀅝􀇀􀄞􀆌􀆐􀅝􀆚􀇇
􀁅􀆵􀆚􀆌􀅝􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀄂􀅯􀀃
􀆋􀆵􀄂􀅯􀅝􀆚􀇇
􀀯􀅶􀄚􀅝􀇀􀅝􀄚􀆵􀄂􀅯􀀃
􀆉􀅽􀆉􀆵􀅯􀄂􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀀃􀄨􀅽􀅽􀄚􀀃
􀄐􀅽􀅶􀆐􀆵􀅵􀆉􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶
􀀜􀅶􀄞􀆌􀅐􀇇􀀃􀅝􀅶􀆚􀄂􀅬􀄞
􀁅􀆵􀆚􀆌􀅝􀄞􀅶􀆚􀀃􀅝􀅶􀆚􀄂􀅬􀄞
􀀘􀅝􀄞􀆚􀄂􀆌􀇇􀀃􀄚􀅝􀇀􀄞􀆌􀆐􀅝􀆚􀇇
􀀯􀅶􀄚􀅝􀇀􀅝􀄚􀆵􀄂􀅯􀍬
􀆉􀅽􀆉􀆵􀅯􀄂􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀀃
􀅶􀆵􀆚􀆌􀅝􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀄂􀅯􀀃􀆐􀆚􀄂􀆚􀆵􀆐
􀀄􀅶􀆚􀆌􀆉􀅽􀅵􀄞􀆚􀆌􀅝􀄐􀆐
􀁅􀆵􀆚􀆌􀅝􀄞􀅶􀆚􀀃􀅝􀅶􀆚􀄂􀅬􀄞
􀀜􀅶􀄞􀆌􀅐􀇇􀀃􀅝􀅶􀆚􀄂􀅬􀄞
􀀬􀄞􀄂􀅯􀆚􀅚
􀁄􀅽􀆌􀄏􀅝􀄚􀅝􀆚􀇇
􀁄􀅽􀆌􀆚􀄂􀅯􀅝􀆚􀇇
􀀬􀅽􀆵􀆐􀄞􀅚􀅽􀅯􀄚􀀃􀆋􀆵􀄂􀅯􀅝􀆚􀇇􀀃􀅽􀄨􀀃􀄐􀄂􀆌􀄞
􀀦􀅽􀅽􀄚􀀃􀆐􀄂􀄨􀄞􀆚􀇇
􀀾􀅝􀇀􀄞􀆐􀆚􀅽􀄐􀅬􀀃􀄂􀅶􀄚􀀃􀇀􀄞􀄐􀆚􀅽􀆌􀍲􀆌􀄞􀅯􀄂􀆚􀄞􀄚􀀃
􀅝􀅯􀅯􀅶􀄞􀆐􀆐􀄞􀆐
􀀦􀅽􀅽􀄚􀀃􀎘􀀃􀇁􀄂􀆚􀄞􀆌􀄏􀅽􀆌􀅶􀄞􀀃􀅝􀅯􀅯􀅶􀄞􀆐􀆐􀄞􀆐
Figure 1. Conceptual framework of the links between agriculture, the food system, nutrition, and
public health. Source: Adopted from [16].
In the literature, we observed two streams of thoughts, which are interesting to take into account.
The first explored the impact of commercialization on farmers’ income and poverty. These studies
hypothesized that commercialization has a positive impact on a farmer’s income. In addition, some
of these studies assumed that improved income will also affect food security in a positive way.
The results on farmers’ income from these studies ranged from negative to positive depending on
the local conditions, while the effects of increased income on food security were either positive or
neutral, depending on household decisions. The decisions tended to vary based on culture and social
groups [17]. Increased income could increase the demand for more diversified and nutritious diets,
namely an increase in expenditures on animal products, fruits, and vegetables to replace cereals and
pulses [18]. Although increased diversification tends to yield higher levels of micronutrient content
in diets, this might not be the case for caloric intake [19]. When income increases, households do not
17
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
spend everything on obtaining more calories. Instead, they often buy better-tasting and more expensive
calories [20]. Moreover, non-food expenditures are also an important factor at play. Households might
prioritize to purchase non-food items over increasing their caloric intake [20].
For example, in a study in the Philippines, cash crops production significantly increased household
income, but due to the purchasing of more expensive calories and non-food items, this increase did not
translate into a higher preschooler nutritional status [21]. In a study concerning Southwestern Kenya,
similar results were found [22]. Cash crop production increased income and showed a small positive
effect on household caloric intake. The additional income, however, was mainly spent on non-food
items such as housing and school fees.
The second stream of literature focused on the impact of commercialization and food security
directly. The impact of commercialization on food security could also function through changes in
farmers’ own production [16], rather than only through income.
On the one hand, increases in income provide farmers with the opportunity to make investments
that could lead to higher productivity, which would improve food security [23,24]. On the other hand,
commercialization can lead to less diversification of crops and more specialization at the smallholder
level, but in general, diversification tends to increase at the sector level [25]. In the case of the Malawian
domestic food crisis for instance, the effect of commercialization on food security was negative [26].
During the period of food price shocks, cash crop production was associated with negative health
effects on children in the utero state [26].
A more recent study based on data from three African countries confirmed the earlier findings
that there is little evidence for a relationship between commercialization and food security [9].
In contrast to many earlier studies, the study did not investigate cash crop production as an indicator
of commercialization but used the share of output sold at the market of total production [9]. However,
the commercialization of input factors, i.e., participation at input markets of fertilizer and pesticides,
for instance, as included in this study, was not considered.
The relationship between agricultural commercialization and food security can also be considered
at a more macro-economic level. Agricultural commercialization causes households in different areas
with different resources to specialize in different crops as the agricultural transformation takes place.
This leads to greater diversification on the level of the agricultural sector as a whole. Finally, the highest
level of aggregation, the economy as a whole, eventually shows the highest level of diversification.
Originally, this diversity is expected to be low, but the increased importance and accessibility of
international trade will fuel the inherent desire of people for more diverse diets [25].
2.2. Commercialization
One of the main focuses of this research is comparing different ways of operationalizing
commercialization. Most research on commercialization has been explored from the perspective
of agricultural development [9]. These studies use a very simple definition of commercialization with
an indicator that only focuses on whether a farmer grows cash crops or not. When farmers are growing
cash crops, it means that they are market-oriented for selling their production. Cash-crop production
is frequently accompanied by the modernization and intensification of cultivation through improved
inputs or investments [27].
In this paper, we will look at the impact of commercialization at the farm level from a more
holistic perspective, namely the food system perspective. This means that we do not only link
commercialization to what farmers produce but also link it to what farmers require for their
productions, such as the different factor inputs (e.g., land, labor, and capital, but also inputs like seed,
fertilizer, etc.). Even when cash-crop growing is considered to be the definition of commercialization,
commercialization of agriculture involves multiple aspects including the input and the output side of
production [1,12].
In total, we will consider two separate measures of commercialization, each of which represents a
crucial element of agricultural commercialization, namely output and input markets. We will consider
the effect of each of these measures on food security separately. The most commonly used measure
18
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
of commercialization is that of output markets. The cash crop indicator that was mentioned above is
also an example of this, as this indicator would consider whether or not households are participating
in cash crop production—which in the case of cash crops is equal to output markets, as they are not
destined for own consumption at all.
2.2.1. Cash crop production share (CCPS)
In practice, smallholder farmers that are involved in cash-crop growing are likely to be involved in
trading non-cash crops as well. Therefore, we will not use the dichotomous indicator for involvement in
cash-crop production but we will use the cash-crop share in the total production value. The advantage
of this share is that it is more comparable with other indicators that we will explore in this study.
Suppose that a farmer can grow K different types of crops. We define a subset Kc of cash crops.
Then the CCPS indicator is defined as:
CCPSi =
ΣKc
c=1 PcQic
ΣK
k=1 PkQik
(1)
where Qic is the quantity of cash crop c produced by farm household i evaluated at an average
community level price Pc, and Qik is the total quantity of crop k produced by farm household i,
evaluated at an average community level price Pk. Kc is the set of crops identified as cash crops and c
is the index of cash crops with c ∈ Kc. The set of cash crops Kc is a subset of the set of all crops K.
So, if a farm household i only sells cash crops, CCPSi = 1. If a farm household does not sell any
cash crops, CCPSi = 0. Note that this farmer could sell non-cash crops at the market, which will not
be reflected by the CCPS indicator.
2.2.2. Crop output market participation share (COMPS)
In order to take into account all market sales of crops by a farmer household, we use the COMPS
indicator, which is calculated as the proportion of the value of crops sold at the market and the total
value of crop production [28].
COMPSi =
ΣK
k=1 PkSik
ΣK
k=1 PkQik
(2)
where Sik is the quantity of crops k sold at the market by farm household i evaluated at an average
community level price Pk. Note that Sik ≤ Qik. Therefore, when a farm household i sells the whole
crop production at the market, Sik = Qik and COMPSi = 1. When a farm household does not sell any
crop production at the market, Sik = 0 and COMPSi = 0.
2.2.3. Crop input market participation share (CIMPS)
Both the CCPS and COMPS indicators above are based on the market sales of a household farm,
which only partly comply with the food-system perspective. In order to obtain a more comprehensive
picture, we propose the crop input market participation share (CIMPS) indicator. It is defined as the
share of purchased inputs value to the total value of inputs used for production.
CIMPSi =
ΣR
r=1WrXir
ΣR
r=1Wr Iir
(3)
where Xir is the amount of input r purchased (or hired in the case of labor) by the farm household i at
the average input price Wr, Iir is the total amount of input r used in the production of the household,
R is the set of different inputs, and r is the index of inputs with r ∈ R. So, when the farm households
only uses inputs from the market, Xik = Iik, and CIMPSi = 1. Conversely, when the farm household
does not purchase any inputs from the market, Xik = 0 and CIMPSi = 1. In the case of the CIMPS
indicator, we use the (calculated) value of inputs so that we can sum different inputs, which is infeasible
when using physical amounts. Moreover, the use of physical amounts could be problematic in the case
of fertilizer use because different crops require different amounts of fertilizer [12].
19
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
2.3. Food Security
Acommon indicator of food security in the literature is the energy intake of food consumption [21,28,29].
We specify this measure in our study as the caloric energy intake per day per adult male equivalent.
However, even when households have sufficient levels of caloric intake, they might still lack
diversity in the intake of their nutrients [29]. To explore dietary diversity, we apply the Food Variety
Score (FVS), which reflects the diversity of diets of households, as the VLSS lacks data on micronutrient
consumption. The FVS is a count of the number of food items consumed, which is calculated for all
households separately. In the FVS, all food items are equally weighted.
With the two food security indicators together, a more comprehensive outlook on food security
can be encapsulated. For instance, farm households might have sufficient caloric intake, but their diet
still might lack diversity in nutrients, as indicated by FVS [29]. Conversely, farm households might
have insufficient caloric energy intake but a high variety of their diet. The two indicators need to be
examined together to reach an accurate and balanced conclusion.
2.4. Regression Specifications
To avoid multi-collinearity, three separate regression models are specified, each with a different
indicator for commercialization. The specifications are:
Yit = β0 + β1Cit + β2Zit + εit (4)
where Yit is the food security status of household i at time t, Cit is the farm household’s
commercialization indicator, Zit is a set of explanatory variables, and εit is the error term.
The explanatory variables include socio-economic and farm characteristics of the farm household.
Socio-economic characteristics comprise of age, gender, and education level of the household head,
as well as the household size and the dependency ratio. The dependency ratio is the ratio of the
number of children and elderly in a household over the number of household members in the labor
force. Farm characteristics include land holdings, the value of farm equipment, and the livestock
holdings. Moreover, region-specific dummies to correct for unobserved heterogeneity across regions
or use panel data to correct for unobserved heterogeneity across individuals are also used.
When regressing the effect of commercialization on food security at the household level, there
may be differences in access to credit or access to markets that influence the household’s transaction
costs, and these are captured by household- and region-specific factors [30]. Thus, the circumstances
of a farm household partly pre-determine the effect of commercialization. Farmers in remote areas
with large distances to markets are less likely to participate in market activities (selling crop yields or
buying crop inputs).
In similar studies, the food security model specified in Equation (4) is likely to suffer from
misspecification because of a potential causal relationship between food security and commercialization,
or unobserved heterogeneity. As Equation (4) reflects the impact of commercialization on food security,
the status of food security might also affect the degree of commercialization in the next growing season.
As we observe the food security status after a harvesting period, we expect that the commercialization
indicators affect the food security status but not the other way around. In other words, it is unlikely
that endogeneity of commercialization factors is present.
As indicated in Equation (4), we apply a panel data specification in our analyses. However, the
panel data estimation results with the fixed effects (FE) estimator indicated that there is only minor
variation in our samples and subsamples over time. As a result, we only looked at the first difference
estimator, based on the specification in Equation (5).
ΔYit = β0 + β1ΔCit + β2ΔZit + εit (5)
20
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
In Equation (5), there is the same set of explanatory variables as in Equation (1). For all
combinations of two food security indicators (Yit) and three commercialization indicators (Cit), we
estimated four specifications: OLS 1992/93, 1997/98, pooled OLS, and first difference estimations.
3. Data
This study uses two cross-sections of the Vietnam Living Standards Survey (VLSS), namely for
the periods 1992/93 and 1997/98. The VLSS was conducted by Vietnam’s General Statistics Office
(GSO) in collaboration with theWorld Bank [31,32]. Both surveys are representative at the national and
regional level. The surveys include 4800 and 6002 households for 1992/93 and 1997/98, respectively
(Table 1). A total of approximately 4300 households participated in both surveys [3].
Table 1. Households types included in the Vietnam Living Standards Survey (VLSS) 1992/93 and
1997/98.
Household Type
1992/93 1997/98
# Share (%) # Share (%)
Total number of households 4800 100.0 6002 100.0
No agricultural production 846 17.6 1647 27.4
Only livestock production 196 4.1 161 2.7
Involved in crop production 3758 78.3 4194 69.9
Involved in cropping 3758 100.0 4194 100.0
Involved in cropping in both years 3231 86.0 3231 77.0
Only one of the years 527 14.0 963 23.0
Sample 3231 100.0 3231 100.0
Included observations 2943 91.1 2943 91.1
Excluded observations 288 8.9 288 8.9
The questionnaires of the surveys included questions on households’ food consumption,
agriculture (production and equipment), demographics, and socio-economic aspects. In addition,
community questionnaires of the VLSS were administered in 120 rural communities included in
the sample. This community questionnaire consists of questions on demographics, economy and
infrastructure, education, health and agriculture, and prices.
According to the VLSS in 1992/93, 82.4% of the Vietnamese households were involved in
agriculture, and this share declined to 72.6% in 1998, see Table 1. For households involved in crop
production, the share declined from 78.3% in 1992/93 to 69.9% in 1997/98. The declining trend in
agricultural involvement in Vietnamese households was also observed by the World Bank, which
reported a strong decline in the employment in agriculture from 70% of the total employment to 65.3%
between 1996 and 1998 [11].
For analyzing the impact of commercialization on food security, we select a sample of households
which are involved in crop production and were present in both surveys. In this way, we can see
the development of household farms with respect to both commercialization activities and food
security. Farm households with missing data or extreme/outlying values on relevant indicators
on commercialization and food security were excluded. We trimmed caloric intake per adult
male equivalent per day to the range of 500–5000 kilocalories. The final sample contained 2943
farm households.
3.1. Food Security
Both the caloric intake and the FVS were derived from the food consumption section of the VLSS.
It registers food consumption for households rather than individuals. Respondents were asked to recall
food consumption for two lengths of periods, annually with information on annual food expenditures
21
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
and physical units and fortnightly with information on whether or not food items were consumed
recently. For caloric intake, we used the annual information to calculate the total amount consumed
for each food item, as we will explain later on. The FVS is not provided by the VLSS, but we derived
it from the survey. First, we counted the food items bought in the previous fortnight. This ignores
the food items (crops or animal products) produced or stored by the household. Then, we calculated
the number of food items which were produced and stored for consumption. Both lists were then
combined into a single list for each household, and the number of food items on the combined list
was counted.
The use of derived or constructed food security indicators has some issues. On the one hand,
food security indicators might be overestimated. Firstly, recall periods of actual food consumption are
preferably one day or one week. Secondly, the consequence of long recall periods is that consumers
achieve higher levels of dietary diversity by definition. Thirdly, the diversity of food consumption is
likely to be overestimated. On the other hand, the food consumption data has a category “food away
from home”, i.e., lunch or dinner eaten outside the home. For this food category, it is unclear what kind
of food items or how much food was eaten. This category was significant. By ignoring this category,
food security indicators might be underestimated. As a consequence, the values of the FVSs derived
from the VLSS may be rather high.
The energy intake of food items was not directly included in the VLSS, and we used the annual
food consumption data in combination with energy conversion factors for food items, see Table A1
in Appendix A. This approach implicitly assumes that no food is wasted [33]. The caloric intake
will fluctuate with the size and the type of household members. In order to make the caloric intake
comparable between different types of household sizes, we calculated the caloric intake per day per
Adult Male Equivalent (AME). The AME indicator was derived from the household composition based
on the conversion factors for age and gender of the household members, see Table A2 in Appendix A.
The mean AME in 1992/93 was 4.05 and in 1997/98, it was 3.95. This is a decline of 0.5%, while the
average household size declined by more than 3%, see Table A3 in Appendix A.
The average households’ caloric intake in the sample increased from 2514 kcal per AME per day in
1992/93 to 2531 kcal in 1997/98, which is an increase of 0.7% (Table 2). In 1992/93, Central Highlands
showed the highest average energy intake (2854 kcal) and North Central Coast the lowest (2307 kcal).
The other regions all have an average caloric intake that is similar to the national average. In 1997/98,
the differences in energy intake across regions are negligible—the Red River Delta showed the highest
energy intake (2620 kcal) and South Central Coast the lowest (2434 kcal) in 1997/98. The highest
increase observed was 6.8% in the North Central Coast region, and the highest decline was—13.2% in
the Central Highlands.
Table 2. Mean, standard deviation, and relative change of the caloric intake per adult male equivalents
(AME) per day (in kcal) per region and per period.
1992/93 1997/98 Change
Region Mean St.dev Mean St.dev %
North mountains and midlands 2587 580 2594 523 0.28
Red River Delta 2540 531 2620 575 3.11
North Central Coast 2307 523 2463 513 6.76
South Central Coast 2506 745 2434 531 −2.90
Central Highlands 2854 785 2479 446 −13.16
Southeast 2561 783 2563 562 0.06
Mekong Delta 2542 723 2455 614 −3.42
Total 2514 634 2531 557 0.69
22
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
Table 3 shows the constructed Food Variety Score for the different regions in Vietnam. The FVS
increased from 9.4 in 1992/93 to 10.8 1997/98, which is an increase of 14.6%. The highest FVS found
was in the Central Highlands for both cross-sections of the sample, namely 11.6 and 12.1 in 1992/93
and 1997/98, respectively. The north mountains and midlands region showed the lowest FVS in
1992/93 (8.2) and in 1997/98 (9.7). The FVSs of all regions increased except for the Mekong Delta,
where the FVS declined from 11.0 in 1992/93 to 10.1 in 1997/98. The highest increase in the period
was observed in the Southeast region with an increase of 32.3%.
Table 3. Mean, standard deviation, and relative change of the Food Variety Score (FVS) per region and
per period.
1992/93 1997/98 Change
Region Mean Standard
Deviation Mean Standard
Deviation %
North mountains and midlands 8.18 3.73 9.69 4.15 18.45
Red River Delta 8.37 4.16 10.07 4.96 20.25
North Central Coast 9.32 3.72 10.84 4.57 16.38
South Central Coast 10.31 4.43 13.15 3.98 27.56
Central Highlands 11.58 5.88 12.11 3.51 4.55
Southeast 10.95 4.20 14.49 4.63 32.29
Mekong Delta 10.96 4.79 10.05 4.14 −8.35
Total 9.39 4.35 10.77 4.65 14.64
Therefore, four regions (i.e., North mountains and midlands, Red River Delta, North Central
Coast, and Southeast) showed higher caloric intake and diversity, while Mekong Delta showed a
decline in both indicators. Central Highlands and South Central Coast had lower caloric intakes
but larger diversity. It is important to note that we only compared the average of the food security
indicators. The individual score of farm households may differ from this average trend in food security,
see Figure 2.
(a) (b)
Figure 2. Change of food security indicators between 1992/93 and 1997/98 at the farm household level:
this is (a) caloric intake per adult male equivalent (AME) per day (kcal) and (b) Food Variety Score (FVS).
3.2. Commercialization
After the political and economic changes that took place in Vietnam, it is reasonable to expect
farmers and farm households to have more opportunities to access markets, which, from a food-system
perspective, refers to both for selling their outputs, as well as for purchasing their agricultural inputs.
23
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
Farmers grow cash crops usually for market sales or exports. In Vietnam, the crops produced for
export are cashew, coffee, pepper, rubber, and tea [34]. Rice is both produced for export and domestic
consumption, but the share of rice that is sold on the domestic markets is much lower than the shares
of the cash crops named above [34]. Moreover, rice is not only the main crop produced in Vietnam,
but there are also land restrictions that enforce the production of rice in certain areas [35]. For these
reasons, rice is not included in the list of cash crops as was done in some earlier studies [34].
Table 4 shows the descriptive statistics of the CCPS indicator, which measures the share of
cash-crop value in the total value of production. At the national level, the share of cash crops is 3–4%
in both cross-sections. Table 4 shows that there is a large difference in the CCPS indicator values across
regions. Central Highlands and the Southeast region are regions known for their cash-crop production.
Table 4. Mean and standard deviation of the cash crop participation share (CCPS) per region and
per survey.
1992/93 1997/98
Region Mean Standard
Deviation Mean Standard
Deviation
North mountains and midlands 1.95 6.50 0.87 3.83
Red River Delta 0.24 2.12 0.24 2.18
North Central Coast 1.33 6.53 1.95 7.92
South Central Coast 1.68 8.36 1.00 4.74
Central Highlands 47.16 36.14 74.90 38.42
Southeast 19.28 33.05 19.86 35.85
Mekong Delta 0.21 1.79 0.11 0.99
Total 3.28 13.92 3.82 16.88
In Central Highlands and the Southeast region, the CCPS indicator is significant and has increased
over time, while in the other regions the CCPS indicator is lower than 2%. In Central Highlands, the
CCPS indicator increased from 47% to almost 75% in the period of analysis, which represents almost a
59% increase. The CCPS indicator for the Southeast region increased more marginally, from 19.3% to
19.9% (a 3% increase).
Table 5 shows the descriptive statistics of the COMPS indicator, which reflects the total share of
the marketed output in the total production value. The national average was 28.2% in 1992/93 and
40.2% in 1997/98. This represents an increase of 42.4%. All regions showed a substantial increase of the
COMPS over time. As shown in Table 5, there are large differences across regions. Central Highlands
and the Southeast region have high values of COMPS in 1992/93, as well as in 1997/98. Both regions
also have significant shares of cash crops which is also reflected in the COMPS. The increase of the
COMPS for both regions between 1992/93 and 1997/98 was between 20% and 25%, and this is lower
than the national average (42.4%), see Table 7. The Mekong Delta region showed a high value for the
COMPS compared to the northern, non-cash crop regions.
24
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
Table 5. Mean and standard deviation of the crop output market participation share (COMPS) per
region and per survey.
1992/93 1997/98
Region Mean Standard
Deviation Mean Standard
Deviation
North mountains and midlands 21.16 18.41 30.47 23.93
Red River Delta 20.00 16.22 28.78 21.10
North Central Coast 20.12 16.24 30.09 20.98
South Central Coast 21.71 21.53 35.34 23.47
Central Highlands 69.50 24.17 84.89 22.61
Southeast 51.09 33.86 63.60 31.80
Mekong Delta 46.73 26.40 66.85 26.10
Total 28.23 24.78 40.20 28.95
The CIMPS reflects the share of inputs purchased in the total input use for production. Although
we could have taken into account multiple types of input such as labor, seeds, etc., we limited this
indicator to fertilizer use alone because there were no reliable indicators for other inputs purchased at
the market such as pesticides or irrigation water. There are two types of fertilizers in the VLSS, namely
chemical fertilizer and organic fertilizer. Chemical fertilizer was always purchased at the market, while
organic fertilizer can be produced by the farmer or purchased at the market. This was registered as
part of the agricultural production of the VLSS. The CIMPS indicator is defined as the sum of chemical
and organic fertilizer purchased over the total value of fertilizer used for production.
Table 6 shows the CIMPS indicator across regions and over time. On average, 47.7% of the total
fertilizer used was purchased at the market in 1992/93, this share increased to 51.6% in 1997/98. This
is an increase of more than 8% in 5 years. Note that this increase does not indicate whether fertilizer
use has increased or not. Furthermore, Table 6 shows large differences in the values of the CIMPS,
although the differences are stable over time. In the Mekong Delta, farmers purchased most of the
fertilizer used at the markets. Also, in the Central Highlands and the Southeast region, the CIMPS
values were equal to or over 80%. In the other four regions, the CIMPS value was in the range of
25-50%. All regions showed an increase of the CIMPS over time. In the north mountains and midlands,
the increase of the CIMPS was 28% across the 2 periods examined, see Table 7.
Table 6. Mean, standard deviation, and relative change of the crop input market share (CIMPS) per
region and per survey.
1992/93 1997/98
Region Mean Standard
Deviation Mean Standard
Deviation
North mountains and midlands 25.16 22.06 32.21 20.75
Red River Delta 35.68 18.55 38.21 22.62
North Central Coast 28.15 21.17 31.00 20.11
South Central Coast 44.67 29.41 50.88 30.50
Central Highlands 79.77 29.54 87.43 23.90
Southeast 81.14 26.17 82.29 25.45
Mekong Delta 97.28 10.29 99.55 2.64
Total 47.68 34.20 51.58 33.59
25
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
Table 7. Change in cash crop participation share (CCPS), crop output market participation share
(COMPS), and crop input market participation share (CIMPS) over time per region.
CCPS COMPS CIMPS
Region Change (%) Change (%) Change (%)
North mountains and midlands 44.0 28.0
Red River Delta 43.9 7.1
North Central Coast 49.6 10.1
South Central Coast 62.8 13.9
Central Highlands 58.80 22.1 9.6
Southeast 3.02 24.5 1.4
Mekong Delta 43.0 2.3
Total 16.34 42.4 8.2
At the individual farm level, the picture is similar, see Figure 3.
(a) (b)
(c)
Figure 3. Change of commercialization indicators between 1992/93 and 1997/98 at farm household
level: (a) cash crop participation share (CCPS), (b) crop output market participation share (COMPS)
and (c) crop input market participation share (CIMPS).
4. Results
The results of the descriptive statistics analysis in the previous section indicate the heterogeneity
of the regions with respect to food security, commercialization, and the development of both over time.
In this section, we will explore whether or not there is a relationship between commercialization and
food security. In particular, we are interested in whether or not commercialization after a political
and economic change can contribute to an improved food security status of crop-farming households.
We applied the regressions on three commercialization indicators (CCPS, COMPS, and CIMPS) to two
food security indicators (caloric intake and dietary diversity measured by the FVS). The regressions
were run separately for the seven regions of Vietnam.
26
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
For all combinations of commercialization indicators, food security indicators, and regions,
we applied four specifications. For the first two specifications, we applied a linear model for each year
separately, so that we can identify whether or not the coefficients of commercialization differ over
time, per region. Then, we used a specification for a pooled regression assuming that coefficients for
determinants are the same for both years. Finally, we applied a fixed effects (FE) difference estimator,
because the within group variation in our sample was limited and yielded biased results.
Below, we first present the impact of commercialization on caloric intake, followed by the impact
of commercialization on the dietary diversity of the households. For convenience, we only present the
results of the coefficients of the commercialization indicators in the tables. Detailed estimation results
are presented in supplementary tables.
4.1. Caloric Intake
The impact of the CCPS was only tested for the Central Highlands and the Southeast regions
because the participation in cash-crop production was negligible in the other regions. For Central
Highlands, there is no significant effect for CCPS on the caloric intake in any of the four specifications,
see Table 8. In the case of the Southeast region, the impact of CCPS on FVS was positive and significant
for all specifications.
Table 8. Regression results of cash crop participation share (CCPS), crop output market participation
share (COMPS), and crop input market participation share (CIMPS) on caloric intake per adult male
equivalent (AME) per day.
Region (Number of observations) OLS 1992/93 OLS 1997/98 Pooled Difference-in-
Difference
CCPS
Central Highlands (74) −254.74 184.13 14.55 113.70
Southeast (181) 392.13 ** 231.42 * 310.15 *** 314.14 **
COMPS
North mountains and midlands (606) 58.33 −49.67 −7.66 76.01
Red River Delta (738) −33.55 −193.98** −119.02 −104.12
North Central Coast (530) −100.93 66.07 33.90 161.78
South Central Coast (303) 113.87 78.63 81.93 213.70
Central Highlands (74) −293.37 −75.83 −43.90 −257.52
Southeast (181) −12.87 166.34 89.71 100.30
Mekong Delta (511) 147.51 −110.17 37.73 115.12
CIMPS
North mountains and midlands (606) 238.67 ** −157.26* 36.15 122.43
Red River Delta (738) −262.11 ** −138.68 −174.64 *** −307.49 ***
North Central Coast (530) 363.87 *** 42.10 198.75 *** 296.98 ***
South Central Coast (303) −90.14 103.16 −6.96 8.70
Central Highlands (74) 327.81 199.16 277.89 73.65
Southeast (181) 6.92 −103.54 −48.01 14.72
Mekong Delta (511) 328.96 −1,494.9 283.14 553.77
Note: * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; and *** p < 0.01.
In the regressions for the impact of the COMPS on caloric intake, there were hardly any significant
coefficients except for a negative coefficient in 1997/98 for the Red River Delta, see Table 8. Market
participation has increased for most regions, as shown in Table 8, but it did not affect the development
of caloric intake. As the CCPS indicator for the Southeast region was positive, the COMPS indicator
for the Southeast region did not show any significant positive impact, although the CCPS measures the
value of cash-crop output and COMPS measures the total value of output sold at markets, i.e., CCPS
is thus a part of the COMPS. Therefore, the crop-farming households that are involved in cash crops
27
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
were more market-oriented and show increased caloric intake, while those not involved in cash-crop
farming did not show any significant change in caloric intake.
For the regressions on caloric intake, there are only two significant coefficients for the CIMPS,
see Table 8. In the North Central Coast region, participation in the input market has had a positive
impact on the caloric intake of crop-farming households. In the Red River Delta region, this impact
was negative. Both regions showed a similar increase in both the CIMPS and caloric intake, see
Table 2, but the impact of the CIMPS on caloric intake was negative. Apparently, the dynamics of the
impacts within both regions are different. In the north mountains and midlands regions, the impact
varied across the two time periods, positive in 1992/93 and negative in 1997/98. In the other regions,
the CIMPS had no significant impact.
The different commercialization indicators appeared to hardly affect the caloric intake indicator.
The results in Table 8 show that in most cases, no significant impact of commercialization indicators
on caloric intake was found. In the Red River Delta, there were negative impacts from both COMPS
and CIMPS. In the North Central Coast, there was a positive impact from the CIMPS, but not from
the COMPS, and in the Southeast region, CCPS had a positive impact on caloric intake. In the North
mountains and midlands region, the impact of the CIMPS was significant but the direction varied over
time. The results indicate that the impact of improved commercialization does not automatically imply
increased caloric intake.
4.2. Dietary Diversity (FVS)
The cash-crop indicators showed mixed results across the regions of the Central Highlands and
the Southeast (Table 9). In the Central Highlands, the impact of CCPS on dietary diversity was negative
but insignificant, while the CCPS had a positive and significant impact on the dietary diversity in the
Southeast region. These impacts are similar to the impacts of CCPS on caloric intake, although the
impact of CCPS on FVS for the Southeast region was more significant than the impacts on caloric intake.
Table 9. Regression results of cash crop participation share (CCPS), crop output market participation
share (COMPS), and crop input market participation share (CIMPS) on Food Variety Score (FVS).
Region (Number of observations) OLS 1992/93 OLS 1997/98 Pooled Difference-in-
Difference
CCPS
Central Highlands (74) −3.16 −1.36 −2.59 ** −0.363
Southeast (181) 0.56 5.43 *** 3.09 *** 3.05 ***
COMPS
North mountains and midlands (606) −0.61 1.53 ** 0.69 0.50
Red River Delta (738) −0.94 −3.24 *** −2.39 *** −1.79 **
North Central Coast (530) −0.87 −1.36 −1.16 * −2.29 **
South Central Coast (303) 1.66 −0.40 0.04 −0.65
Central Highlands (74) 0.46 −0.27 0.15 1.25
Southeast (181) 1.49 1.15 1.28 * 0.20
Mekong Delta (511) 3.20 *** 0.33 1.78 *** 2.68 ***
CIMPS
North mountains and midlands (606) −0.62 −1.11 −0.80 −1.58 **
Red River Delta (738) −4.19 *** 0.11 −1.74 *** −1.49 *
North Central Coast (530) −0.23 2.95 *** 1.25 * 2.66 ***
South Central Coast (303) −0.78 0.0003 −0.32 0.37
Central Highlands (74) 5.01 * −11.08 *** 0.12 −1.42
Southeast (181) −2.05 −1.44 −1.88 * −2.57 *
Mekong Delta (511) −1.14 −12.70 * −1.77 −2.32
Note: * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; and *** p < 0.01.
28
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
The COMPS coefficient in the FVS specification for 1992/93 was significantly positive in the
Mekong Delta, while the coefficient was positive but insignificant for 1997/98. In the north mountains
and midlands, the COMPS coefficient in 1997/98 was significant and positive; although, there was
no significant coefficient in the difference estimator specification. In the Red River Delta, the COMPS
coefficient for FVS was insignificant in 1992/93 but significant and negative in 1997/98. In the other
regions, no significant coefficients were observed. Therefore, in the Southeast region, the CCPS had a
significant impact on FVS while the COMPS did not.
The CIMPS coefficient in the FVS regression for the Red River Delta was negative for 1992/93 and
insignificant for 1997/98, while the opposite was true for the Mekong Delta. In the Central Highland,
the impact was positive for 1992/93 but negative for 1997/98 and insignificant for the difference
estimator specification. In the Southeast region, the CIMPS indicator had a negative impact; although,
this was only observed in the difference estimator specification. In the North Central Coast region,
the CIMPS coefficient in the FVS regression was negative and insignificant in 1992/93, but positive
and significant in 1997/98.
There was a greater number of significant coefficients for the COMPS indicator on dietary diversity
than there was on caloric intake, while the signs of the coefficients were mixed. For the CCPS indicator,
the impacts on dietary diversity were similar to the impacts on caloric intake. This was also true for
the CIMPS indicator for the Red River Delta and the North Central Coast region. In the case of dietary
diversity, the CIMPS indicator had a greater number of coefficients that were significant (than any
other indicators).
To summarize, there is no consistent evidence for an overall impact of commercialization of
crop-growing farmers on food security, either in terms of caloric intake or food diversity in the different
regions in Vietnam. The impacts differ in sign, magnitude, and significance. However, in general,
the impacts appear to be more positive for the southern regions (Central Highlands, the Southeast,
and the Mekong Delta) compared to the northern regions.
5. Discussion and Conclusions
Agricultural commercialization is traditionally measured by the involvement of farmers in
cash-crop production because cash crops are produced to be sold or exported. However, agricultural
commercialization from a food-system perspective needs to also include market participation at other
sectors of the food system, such as input markets. Therefore, we explored three commercialization
indicators, namely the cash crop production share (CCPS), the crop output market participation share
(COMPS), and the input market participation share (CIMPS).
The results showed that the commercialization of crop-farming households has increased over
time after the political and economic regime changes in Vietnam. All three commercialization
indicators increased unanimously but the magnitude of the increase differed widely. Therefore,
it can be concluded that market participation was not limited to the agricultural output market or
the involvement in cash-crop production but also higher participation in input markets. We only
considered fertilizer inputs, as no reliable data on other inputs was available from the survey.
Furthermore, dietary diversity also increased while caloric intake remained rather constant. Although
this is the general trend for Vietnam, there are differences across regions, as observed in earlier
studies [10]. Hence, we focused our attention on the impact of commercialization on food security at
the regional level.
In general, there was limited variation in the caloric intake indicator, and it remains constant
between 1992/93 and 1997/98, while the commercialization indicators exhibited a positive trend.
The combination of these observed trends made it less likely to find a positive relationship between
commercialization indicators and caloric intake. For dietary diversity, however, we observed an
increasing trend.
If we had only looked at the cash crop participation share (CCPS), we would not have been able to
analyze commercialization in five of the seven regions in Vietnam because cash-crop production hardly
29
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
existed in these regions. Only the Central Highlands and the Southeast regions had a significant share
of the farmers involved in cash-crop farming in the 1990s. The results for the Southeast region indicate
that commercialization had a significant positive effect on dietary diversity. For the Central Highlands,
caloric intake dropped in the considered period while commercialization remained relatively constant,
noting that the share of cash-crop participation was already high in this region.
However, when considering the output side of commercialization, where households have
different shares of crop marketing (different values for COMPS), COMPS had a significant positive
effect on the FVS and a negative effect on caloric intake. It is important to note that the significant
positive effect of COMPS on the FVS only seems to be the case in the south of Vietnam. In the northern
regions, there seems to be no significant effect. In earlier studies, there were no significant coefficients
found for the impact of the COMPS indicator on food security [9].
The difference in results between the north and the south is as expected. The benefits of the reforms
differed across the northern and southern regions. Before the reforms, rice and cash-crop production
were mainly concentrated in the south, and the south also suffered most from the export quota that was
in place at that time. Therefore, when this export quota was removed, the southern regions benefited
more than the northern regions [7]. Moreover, farming households in the south already had crop
specialization, rice, and cash crops. Therefore, as a result of the liberalizations, households in the south
were able to more easily adjust their production and the amount sold according to changes in market
conditions, taking advantage of a price increase in rice for instance [7,8].
When looking at the commercialization of the input side of the food system, CIMPS showed no
significant relationships with the food security indicators. This means that there is no clear significant
effect of the CIMPS on food security across regions. However, similar to the impact of the COMPS
indicator, we observed some differences between the north and south. The north experienced larger
increases in their CIMPS compared to the south. From the regression results, the number of significant
negative effects of increased CIMPS on both food security indicators in northern regions was larger than
in southern regions. During the liberalizations, fertilizer supply constraints were largely removed [8],
and the prices of fertilizer dropped [7]. As a result, the amount of fertilizer use increased. Given the
fact that the share of fertilizer purchased at the market was high in the southern regions, the total costs
of fertilizer increased over time, which has had a negative impact on income. [8]. This might explain
the negative impact of commercialization on food security in the southern regions [8].
The results of our analysis show that the relationship between agricultural commercialization and
food security is very complex. The impact depends on both the indicators and the region. Moreover,
obvious trends in certain regions do not directly translate into obvious increases or decreases in the
impact of commercialization on food security. The promotion of agricultural commercialization in
one region, or of one specific type of commercialization, may thus lead to negative impacts, while for
another region, or another type of commercialization, it may lead to positive impacts.
One of the shortcomings of our approach is that we did not take into account other aspects or
developments, such as hired labor for instance. The general trend that can be concluded for developing
countries is that people move away from the agricultural sector. The data showed that there was an
8.4% decrease in crop-producing households between 1992/93 and 1997/98 [10]. For agricultural
households, however, we found that the total average income increased mainly due to increases in
on-farm income (i.e., higher quantities and returns from agricultural production). This indicates that
commercialization of the agricultural activities of households might have been more important than,
for instance, the commercialization of labor [10].
Our analysis was limited to the impact of economic and political changes within a five-year period.
It is likely that full adjustments to these economic changes would occur over a longer period than that
which data were available for. Additionally, if the analysis examined the impact over a longer period,
the results could be less ambiguous and more robust. However, with longer periods, more dynamics at
the farm household level could be introduced, such as changes in households’ composition, changing
households’ head, and entering or exiting of agricultural activities, which would have affected the
regression results.
30
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
To analyze the impact of commercialization on food security, it is important to look at the change
in expenditures. Earlier studies indicated that households spend a larger share of their increased
incomes on non-food items than on food items [10,20]. Our results showed that the FVS, on average,
increased with commercialization while caloric intake did not, and this points to an increase in demand
for more diverse diets, which was observed in earlier studies [18].
Our research could be extended in multiple ways. The CIMPS indicator measures another element
of the food system that can be commercialized. The main drawback of using the CIMPS indicator
is that it is only based on one of the input factors of production, namely fertilizer, although there
are many other inputs to consider such as hired labor and pesticide use, amongst others. Pesticides,
for instance, can only be purchased at the market. The inclusion of pesticides in the CIMPS indicator
would have boiled down to pesticide use or not.
Furthermore, we have explored the impacts of the commercialization indicators on food security
in separate specifications in our analyses so that we would avoid any possible multi-collinearity issues.
From a food-system perspective, it would be interesting to create indicators that combine market
participation in input and output markets for instance.
Finally, the impact of the commercialization of agriculture can also be observed outside agriculture,
such as farmers exiting the industry, labor moving to other sectors outside the food system, or the
entrance of new actors in agriculture such as foreign companies or investors. Additional analyses are
needed to explore the impacts of economic and political changes on these factors.
To conclude, one of the reasons to analyze the impact of commercialization in agriculture on food
security in the regions in Vietnam was to explore the possibilities to transfer these relationships to
other cases like Myanmar. However, it will be hard to find the right circumstances to transfer the
relationships given the large variations in results across regions in our study.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at http://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/11/5/1263/s1.
The document with the regression results underlying the results of Tables 8 and 9 are available.
Author Contributions: V.L, V.J., and T.A. worked on the concepts and methodologies for this paper. V.L. wrote
the paper with contributions of V.J., V.J. analyzed the data with contributions from V.L., T.A. reviewed the paper.
Funding: This research received was funded by the Dutch Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality,
grant number KB-22.
Acknowledgments: The authors thank Maggie Skirtun and anonymous reviewers for their comments that
contributed to improve the quality of this paper. Any remaining errors are ours.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the decision to
publish the results.
Appendix A
Table A1. Calorie conversion rate (calories per kg) for food items [32].
Food Items Calories per kg Food Items Calories per kg
Ordinary rice 3530 Beans 3142
Glutinous rice 3550 Water morning glory 210
Corn/maize 3640 Kohlrabi 300
Cassava 1560 Cabbage 370
Potatoes 1088 Tomatoes 370
Barley, Malt, Millet, Kaoling * 3320 Other vegetables -
Bread wheat, flour 3015 Oranges 430
(pho) Noodle and instant rice soup 3580 Bananas 830
Rice noodle 3400 Mangoes 290
Vermicelli 1285 Other fruits * 170
31
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
Table A1. Cont.
Food Items Calories per kg Food Items Calories per kg
Pork 3956 Fish sauce and dipping sauce 332
Beef and buffalo meat 1233 Salt -
Chicken 1759 Sugar, molasses * 3870
Duck and other poultry meat 1260 Cakes, jams, sweets 4026
Other meat * 2630 Fresh milk 868
Processed meat 3259 Alcohol & beer 470
Fat and oil 9270 Coffee * 560
Fresh fish, shrimp 900 Tea -
Dried/processed fish and shrimp 2409 Beverages
(industrial methods) 470
Other seafood (crab, snails etc.) * 660 Food and drink away
from home * 410
Chicken or duck eggs (per one) ** 1482 Others * 1700
Tofu 980
Peanuts, sesame seeds 5445
Source: Nguyen &Winters [32], adjusted from Vietnam’s National Institute of Nutrition (NIN) and General Statistics
Office (GSO) of Vietnam. Note: * The conversion rate was not available, so we used the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) conversion rates [36]. ** Multiplied with the average weight of a chicken egg in Vietnam [37].
Table A2. FAO adjustment factors for calculating the Adult Male Equivalents (AME) [38].
Age Categories Males Females
<1 0.27 0.27
1–3 0.45 0.45
4–6 0.61 0.61
7–9 0.73 0.73
10–12 0.86 0.78
13–15 0.96 0.83
16–19 1.02 0.77
≥20 1 0.73
Table A3. Adult male equivalents per household and household size in the sample for 1992/93 and
1997/98.
1992/93 1997/98 Change (%)
Regions AME Size AME Size AME Size
North mountains and midlands 4.14 5.34 4.19 5.18 1.14 −3.09
Red River Delta 3.43 4.94 3.35 4.10 −2.27 −17.00
North Central Coast 3.84 4.94 3.81 4.77 −0.88 −3.51
South Central Coast 4.22 5.33 4.02 5.00 −4.77 −6.25
Central Highlands 4.74 6.14 4.76 6.05 0.36 −1.32
Southeast 4.51 5.61 4.41 5.36 −2.15 −4.43
Mekong Delta 4.71 5.91 4.36 5.34 −7.38 −9.70
Total 4.05 5.16 3.95 4.88 −2.53 −5.43
32
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
References
1. Von Braun, J. Agricultural commercialization: Impacts on income and nutrition and implications for policy.
Food Policy 1995, 20, 187–202. [CrossRef]
2. Ingram, J. A food systems approach to researching food security and its interactions with global
environmental change. Food Secur. 2011, 3, 417–431. [CrossRef]
3. Glewwe, P.; Dang, H.-A.H. Was Vietnam’s economic growth in the 1990s pro-poor? An analysis of panel
data from Vietnam. Econ. Dev. Cult. Chang. 2011, 59, 583–608. [CrossRef]
4. Rozelle, S.; Swinnen, J.F. Success and failure of reform: Insights from the transition of agriculture. J. Econ. Lit.
2004, 42, 404–456. [CrossRef]
5. Nguyen, H.H. Regional Welfare Disparities and Regional Economic Growth in Vietnam; Wageningen Universiteit:
Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2009.
6. World Bank. Vietnam: Attacking Poverty; World Bank: Washington, DC, USA, 1999.
7. Benjamin, D.; Brandt, L. Agriculture and income distribution in rural Vietnam under economic reforms:
A tale of two regions. In Economic Growth, Poverty and Household Welfare in Vietnam;World Bank: Washington,
DC, USA, 2004; pp. 133–185.
8. Coello, B. Agriculture and Trade Liberalization in Vietnam; Paris School of Economics; Paris School of Economics:
Paris, France, 2007; p. 25.
9. Carletto, C.; Corral, P.; Guelfi, A. Agricultural commercialization and nutrition revisited: Empirical evidence
from three African countries. Food Policy 2016, 67, 106–118. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Janssen, V. The Effect of Agricultural Commercialization on Food Security the Case of Crop Producing Households in
Post-Reform Vietnam; Wageningen UR:Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2018; p. 66.
11. World Bank. World Development Report 2008: Agriculture for Development; World Bank: Washington, DC, USA;
London, UK, 2007; ISBN 978-0-8213-6809-1.
12. Gebremedhin, B.; Jaleta, M. Commercialization of smallholders: Is market participation enough. In Proceedings
of the Contributed Paper Presented at the Joint 3rd African Association of Agricultural Economists (AAAE)
and 48th Agricultural Economists Association of South Africa (AEASA) Conference, Cape Town, South
Africa, 19–23 September 2010.
13. Fleuret, P.; Fleuret, A. Nutrition, consumption, and agricultural change. Hum. Organ. 1980, 39, 250–260.
[CrossRef]
14. Immink, M.D.; Alarcon, J.A. Household income, food availability, and commercial crop production by
smallholder farmers in the western highlands of Guatemala. Econ. Dev. Cult. Chang. 1993, 41, 319–342.
15. Jaleta, M.; Gebremedhin, B.; Hoekstra, D. Smallholder Commercialization: Processes, Determinants and Impact;
International Livestock Research Institute: Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 2009.
16. Kanter, R.;Walls, H.L.; Tak, M.; Roberts, F.;Waage, J. A conceptual framework for understanding the impacts
of agriculture and food system policies on nutrition and health. Food Secur. 2015, 7, 767–777. [CrossRef]
17. DeWalt, K.M. Nutrition and the Commercialization of Agriculture: Ten Years Later. Soc. Sci. Med. 1993, 36,
1407–1416. [CrossRef]
18. Abdulai, A.; Aubert, D. A cross-section analysis of household demand for food and nutrients in Tanzania.
Agric. Econ. 2004, 31, 67–79. [CrossRef]
19. Gibson, R.S.; Hotz, C. Dietary diversification/modification strategies to enhance micronutrient content and
bioavailability of diets in developing countries. Br. J. Nutr. 2001, 85, S159. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Banerjee, A.; Duflo, E. Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global Poverty; Penguin Books:
London, UK, 2012; ISBN 978-0-7181-9366-9.
21. Bouis, H.E.; Haddad, L.J. Effects of Agricultural Commercialization on Land Tenure, Household Resource
Allocation, and Nutrition in the Philippines; Research Report; International Food Policy Research Institute;
International Food Policy Research Institute in collaboration with the Research Institute for Mindanao
Culture: Washington, DC, USA, 1990; ISBN 978-0-89629-081-5.
22. Kennedy, E.; Cogill, B. The commercialization of agriculture and household-level food security: The case of
Southwestern Kenya. World Dev. 1988, 16, 1075–1081. [CrossRef]
23. Achterbosch, T.; van Berkum, S.; Meijerink, G.; Asbreuk, H.; Oudendag, D. Cash Crops and Food Security:
Contributions to Income, Livelihood Risk and Agricultural Innovation; LEI Wageningen UR: The Hague,
The Netherlands, 2014; ISBN 978-90-8615-673-3.
33
Sustainability 2019, 11, 1263
24. Babatunde, R.O.; Qaim, M. Impact of off-farm income on food security and nutrition in Nigeria. Food Policy
2010, 35, 303–311. [CrossRef]
25. Timmer, C.P. Farmers and Markets: The Political Economy of New Paradigms. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 1997, 79,
621. [CrossRef]
26. Wood, B.; Nelson, C.; Kilic, T.; Murray, S. Up in Smoke? Agricultural Commercialization, Rising Food
Prices and Stunting in Malawi. World Bank Policy ResearchWorking Paper (No. 6650). Available online:
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Talip_Kilic/publication/254387650_Up_in_Smoke_Agricultural_
CommercializationRising_Food_Prices_and_Stunting_in_Malawi/links/00b495384e2d34e7b6000000/
Up-in-Smoke-Agricultural-Commercialization-Rising-Food-Prices-and-Stunting-in-Malawi.pdf?origin=
publication_detail (accessed on 26 February 2019).
27. Niemeijer, R.; Hoorweg, J. 17 Commercialization of Rice and Nutrition: A Case from West Kenya. Available
online: http://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/ddibrowser/1910/export/?format=pdf&generate=yes
(accessed on 26 February 2019).
28. Von Braun, J.; de Haen, H.; Blanken, J. Commercialization of Agriculture under Population Pressure: Effects on
Production, Consumption, and Nutrition in Rwanda; IFPRI:Washington, DC, USA, 1991; ISBN 978-0-89629-087-7.
29. Carletto, C.; Zezza, A.; Banerjee, R. Towards better measurement of household food security: Harmonizing
indicators and the role of household surveys. Glob. Food Secur. 2013, 2, 30–40. [CrossRef]
30. Barrett, C.B. Smallholder market participation: Concepts and evidence from eastern and southern Africa.
Food Policy 2008, 33, 299–317. [CrossRef]
31. General Statistical Office (GSO). State Planning Committee (SPC) Vietnam—Living Standards Survey
1992–1993. Available online: http://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/ddibrowser/1910/export/
?format=pdf&generate=yes (accessed on 26 February 2019).
32. Nguyen, M.C.;Winters, P. The impact of migration on food consumption patterns: The case of Vietnam. Food
Policy 2011, 36, 71–87. [CrossRef]
33. Molini, V. Food Security in Vietnam During the 1990s: The Empirical Evidence; UNU WIDER: Helsinki, Finland,
2006; ISBN 978-92-9190-841-7.
34. Coello, B. Exports liberalization and specialization in cash crop: Gains for Vietnamese households? Econ. Int.
2009, 73–99.
35. Markussen, T.; Tarp, F.; Van Den Broeck, K. The Forgotten Property Rights: Evidence on Land Use Rights in
Vietnam. World Dev. 2011, 39, 839–850. [CrossRef]
36. Mishra, V.; Ray, R. Dietary Diversity, Food Security and Undernourishment: The Vietnamese Evidence.
Asian Econ. J. 2009, 23, 225–247. [CrossRef]
37. Duc, N.V.; Long, T. Poultry Production Systems in Vietnam; FAO: Rome, Italy, 2008; p. 22.
38. Fiedler, J.L.; Smitz, M.-F.; Dupriez, O.; Friedman, J. Household Income and Expenditure Surveys: A Tool for
Accelerating the Development of Evidence-Based Fortification Programs. Food Nutr. Bull. 2008, 29, 306–319.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
34
sustainability
Article
Healthy Diets and Reduced Land Pressure: Towards
a Double Gain for Future Food Systems in Nigeria
Zuzana Smeets-Kristkova 1,2,*, Thom Achterbosch 1 and Marijke Kuiper 1
1 Wageningen Economic Research,Wageningen University & Research, Prinses Beatrixlaan 582,
2595 BM The Hague, The Netherlands; thom.achterbosch@wur.nl (T.A.); marijke.kuiper@wur.nl (M.K.)
2 Czech University of Life Sciences, Faculty of Economics and Management, Kamycka 129,
165 21 Prague, Czech Republic
* Correspondence: zuzana.kristkova@wur.nl; Tel.: +31-645-748743
Received: 31 December 2018; Accepted: 1 February 2019; Published: 6 February 2019
	

Abstract: Nigeria is one of the most dynamic economies in Africa. Strong GDP and population
growth coupled with urbanization trends place tremendous pressures on natural resources and
the food systems that are dependent on them. Understanding the impact of these “mega trends”
is important to identify key leverage points for navigating towards improved nutrition and food
security in Nigeria. This paper contributes to the Foresight Project of the Food Systems for Healthier
Diets which aims to analyse how the food system in Nigeria is expected to transform in the next
decades, and to identify the leverage points for making sure that the transformation contributes to
balanced consumer diets. For the food systems foresight, a well-established global economy-wide
model, MAGNET, is applied that enables to capture the interlinkages among different food industry
players in one consistent framework. By linking MAGNET to the GENUS nutritional database,
it is further possible to relate the developments occurring on a macro-level with detailed macro and
micronutrient consumption. Model projections suggest that a process of intensification of agriculture
in combination with land substitution appears critical for the evolution of food and nutrition security,
and for shifts towards healthy diets for the population. Intensification results in greater diversity
of the production systems, which in turn cascades into positive effects on the diversity in the food
supply and better food security outcomes.
Keywords: food security; CGE model; nutrition; diet diversity; land substitution; agricultural
intensification; baseline projections
1. Introduction
Nigeria is one of the most dynamic economies in Africa. Strong GDP growth and high fertility
rates [1] suggest an unfinished demographic revolution, placing tremendous pressures on natural
resources and the food systems that are dependent on them. In particular, arable land for expansion is
becoming increasingly scarce [2]. Understanding the impact of these “mega trends” on food and
nutrition security in the country is highly relevant. Malnutrition in all its forms remains a key
concern in Nigeria. While chronic malnutrition remains widespread (in 2013, 37% of children under
5 years of age were stunted [3]), the need to curb the rising prevalence of overweight and obesity
among adults and children is emerging as a priority for food security and health policy. Economic
development and changing market conditions are associated with shifts in consumption patterns
that simultaneously move towards and away from healthy diets [4]. Healthy diets typically have
four characteristics—related to quantity, quality, diversity and safety of the diet—and translate into
principles for adult consumption [5]: sufficient consumption of fruit, vegetables, pulses; moderate
consumption of animal source food, with limited intake of processed meat and sugar-sweetened
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835; doi:10.3390/su11030835 35 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
foods and beverages; avoid transfat and replace consumption of saturated fats with vegetable oils
or other sources of unsaturated fat. This paper seeks to contribute with macro-level foresight to the
identification of leverage points in the food system of Nigeria for promoting healthy diets in these
respects with the exception of safety. Of particular interest is the question how Nigeria’s national
food system, given its strong bias towards staple production, could transform towards meeting these
diverse nutritional needs.
There is increasing recognition that the interplay between market decisions and contextual
drivers at multiple levels is important for understanding dietary quality and nutritional outcomes
of food systems [5]. The definition of a food system of the High Level Panel of Experts is also
used in this paper: “a food system gathers all the elements (environment, people, inputs, processes,
infrastructures, institutions, etc.) and activities that relate to the production, processing, distribution,
preparation and consumption of food, and the output of these activities, including socio-economic
and environmental outcomes” [6]. This concept of a food system takes into account the complexity of
external driving forces that shape food and nutrition security and dietary patterns across different levels.
These drivers appear as the key factors that determine the changes in the food system. Such drivers
are commonly grouped into 5 categories: innovation, technology and infrastructure; political and
economic; socio-cultural; and demographic drivers [7]. In the expanding literature on drivers of global
and national food systems, there is often little attention for changes that originate “from within” the
food system [8]. The response of entrepreneurs, consumers and regulators to the external drivers,
and the interplay of the behaviour of different actors is what makes the food system complex to
understand [5,7,9].
A useful distinction can be made between the indirect and the direct drivers in the food system.
This classification follows a governance perspective on drivers: it separates those that can be influenced
by food system actors (direct drivers) from those that cannot be influenced (indirect drivers) [9].
Three types of feedback loops in food systems are proposed by this framework: (1) adjustments
in the market and external effects that follow from interaction between producer and consumer
decisions under the influence of drivers of change; (2) adjustments in the policy framework on the
basis of market outcomes and external effects that are inconsistent with prevailing visions in public
policy; (3) ramifications in the global food system, e.g., in world commodity markets, biophysical or
geopolitical balances, etc.
Although there is a recognition of the need for understanding the relations between drivers of
food systems and their impact on diets and nutrition, the empirical evidence from the existing foresight
studies is rather scarce, particularly regarding the macro-economic perspective of food systems impact
on nutrition. One review identified a gap in foresight research regarding how alternative uses of
agricultural land impact food security considering both poor people’s access to productive resources
and income-earning opportunities as well as their access to food and the prevalence of hunger [10].
These recommendations are fully reflected in this paper where land is identified as the key factor that
determines the future development of food systems and food security impacts.
This study thus contributes to the gap in the literature with the objective to provide national-level
projections of the demand for food, and to explore how various direct and indirect drivers in the
food system (farm input and output prices, demand for on-farm and off-farm labour, consumer
preferences, etc.) interact with the general drivers of the food system, and to evaluate ex-ante how
these dynamics affect diet outcomes at population level.
The interplay of indirect and direct drivers within the food system are explored in this paper
using a computable general equilibrium (CGE) model for Nigeria and the rest of the world. The model
is presented in Section 2, along with a scenario framework for exploring future food systems and
diets in Nigeria. The results of the impact of drivers and interconnections on food systems outcomes
and diets are presented in Section 4, followed by a discussion of the limitations and implications of
the paper.
36
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Scenario Framework for Exploring Future Food Systems in Nigeria
This paper employs scenario methods to understand how the indirect drivers of the food system
interact at multiple scales simultaneously—supra-national level, national and sub-national level for
Nigeria and household level—and addresses feedback loops between producers and consumers
in Nigeria (feedback loop 1) and between the national and supranational level (feedback loop 3).
An advanced quantitative modelling framework is used for this purpose, and will be introduced in the
this section. A possible policy response (feedback loop 2) is explored in the discussion. The indirect
drivers of change and specific characteristics of the Nigeria food system and its drivers are incorporated
in the analysis as follows:
• Supra-national level: Included are the unequal levels of wealth and rates of economic growth among
countries and regions, the sectoral composition and human capital dimension of growth including
changes in population growth. Excluded is the variation across countries in the quality of basic
services that are available to the population. For example, Nigeria has the largest population
of out-of-school youth in the world [11,12]. The Nigerian population is increasingly youthful
and urbanized, with the urban population expected to outstrip the rural population by 2025 [13].
Interactions with global markets for commodities and merchandise, and integration with the
global economy through international trade and adjustments of real exchange rates are included;
currency fluctuations and stabilization policies are excluded. The differentiated effect of climate
change is included at global level. Section 2.3 dwells largely on these drivers.
• National and sub-national level: Nigerian food systems are the most important sector in the country,
representing 41% of Nigeria’s value added in 2011 (see Section 3.3). Included in the analysis are the
interaction between agriculture, food supply chains and non-agriculture sectors (energy supply,
manufacturing, services), and the interplay between technology change and changes in the factors
of production at the national level. Assumptions on the expected rate of technological progress
are included in the analysis; excluded are the process of diffusion and adoption. The connection
between public research, education and extension services is generally considered weak [14,15],
which hampers adoption processes. Nigeria’s core infrastructure stock was low (about 20–25%
of GDP) until recently, yet investment in infrastructure has greatly increased in the last 4–5 years.
The impact of such investments on infrastructural developments such as roads, railways, storage
facilities, as well as energy and ICT are excluded from the analysis. Being almost completely
rain-fed, cropping systems and the national food system in Nigeria are sensitive to climatic
conditions. Included in the scope of the analysis is the impact of global climate change on
agricultural yields. Excluded from the analysis are the feedback mechanisms from more extreme
weather, degraded land and water resources, and climate change adaptation on the resilience
of the primary production systems [16]. Human-induced crises such as forced displacement of
populations due to armed conflicts, insurgency, forced evictions and herdsmen-farmers clashes
are affecting food systems in Nigeria, e.g., [17,18]. The impact of conflict and political instability
on the food system is excluded from the analysis. Political drivers of food systems including
leadership and governance and conflicts/humanitarian crises are largely excluded from the
analysis, except for limited discussions of land tenure systems (Section 2.3).
• Household level: Included are the access to productive assets such as land or fishing grounds, capital
and infrastructure for livelihood activities of households, with distinctions between skills levels in
the labour market; excluded from the analysis are community-level or other in-country inequalities
in access to these assets, as well in access to care, hygiene environment and opportunities for
schooling. While demographic change is included in terms of population growth rates, it is not
included how the food system must increasingly cater for young and urban consumers, with their
nutritional needs and aspirations. Urban patterns of food choice are noticeably different from
rural patterns across Africa, and include less consumption of traditional staples, more animal
37
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
and dairy products, more processed food, and a much greater proportion of food consumed
outside of home [19]. Both the possible globalization of food culture and change of traditional
food systems in Nigeria related to tribal culture have been scarcely documented, see e.g., [20].
Included in the scope of the present study are the variation in food access and composition of
consumed diets across households depending on their regional location. Excluded from the scope
are urban and rural differences in the decision-making regarding consumption in the specific
demographic, socioeconomic and cultural context; the unequal socioeconomic conditions and
institutional environment across households; the unequal distribution of food, money and power
of decision-making between members of the household.
2.2. Economy-Wide Modelling Framework
This study applies the MAGNET (Modular Applied General Equilibrium Tool) model,
a well-established CGE model used for global projections on agriculture, bio-based economy,
climate, food security and nutrition as well as country-specific assessments (see for instance [21–24]).
As an economy-wide model, MAGNET is well placed to examine the costs and benefits of policy
scenarios via changes in input and output prices and allocation of competing (agricultural and
non-agricultural) uses of primary factors and intermediate inputs [25]. From a food systems perspective,
the key strength of MAGNET lies in exploring food systems dynamics, by capturing the interlinkages
among different food industry players (farmers, processors, suppliers, traders and consumers) in
one consistent framework (see the circular flow of MAGNET in Figure 1). Scenario analysis using
MAGNET contributes to an ex-ante identification of challenges and pathways for innovation taking
into account trade-offs and synergies between various objectives.
Figure 1. MAGNET—a complete economic model of nations in the global economy.
2.2.1. MAGNET Model Database
MAGNET is a neoclassical recursive dynamic, multi-regional, multi-commodity computable
general equilibrium (CGE) model. At its core is the well-known Global Trade Analysis project (GTAP)
model and the associated GTAP database. The core of the MAGNET database is the 2011 reference
year of GTAP database version 9.2, distinguishing 140 regions, including Nigeria, 8 production factors
and 57 sectors [26]. To enhance MAGNET’s ability to assess food system and health implications of
38
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
diet changes, FAOSTAT data is used to split standard GTAP sectors, adding more detail in terms of
types of meat (beef, other ruminants, pork, poultry) both in terms of primary products and processed
meat products. FISHSTAT data is used to split the GTAP fish sector into aquaculture, wild catch and
a fish processing sector producing processed fish for consumers and fishmeal for use as animal feed.
To capture the scope for livestock intensification and its potential links to aquaculture, an animal feed
sector is defined which uses fishmeal among other crop-based inputs. For crops a fertilizer sector is
separated from the broader chemical sector, which can be used as a substitute for land. This allows
changes in intensification based on land rent and agricultural prices.
Running the model with the full MAGNET database of 140 regions, 83 sectors and 8 factors
is computationally infeasible. Given the purpose of this study, a food-focused sector aggregation
was used while the world was aggregated in 11 regions, keeping Nigeria as an individual country
(see Table 1). Table 2 lists the food sectors, indicating the amount of food system detail the model is able
to capture at macro level. The complete list of sectors included in MAGNET is in Appendix B, Table A1.
Table 1. Regional aggregation in MAGNET.
Code Description GTAP Regions Included
NGA Nigeria nga
ETH Ethiopia eth
SSA Sub Saharan Africa ben, bfa, cmr, civ, gha, gin, sen, tgo, xwf, xcf, xac, ken, mdg, mwi,
mus, moz, rwa, tza, uga, zmb, zwe, xec, bwa, nam, zaf, xsc
VNM Vietnam vnm
BGD Bangladesh bgd
APTA Asia-Pacific trade agreement chn, hkg, kor, mng, twn, lao, ind, lka
EAS East and South East Asia xea, brn, khm, idn, mys, phl, sgp, tha, xse
EU European Union aut, bel, cze, dk, est, fin, fra, deu, grc, hun, irl, ita, lva, ltu, lux,
mlt, nld, pol, prt, svk, svn, esp, swe, gbr, hr, rou
NAFTA North American FTA can usa, mex, xna
LAM Latin America arg, bol, bra, chl, col, ecu, pry, per, ury, ven, xsm, cri, gtm, hnd,
nic, pan, slv, xca, dom, jam, pri, tto, xcb
ROW Rest of theWorld all remaining regions
Note: GTAP regions are described at: https://www.gtap.agecon.purdue.edu/databases/regions.asp?Version=9.211.
Table 2. Sectoral aggregation in MAGNET (MAGNET codes in brackets).
Category MAGNET Food System Sectors
Arable and horticulture
paddy rice (pdr), wheat (wht); other grains (grain); oilseeds (oils); raw sugar
(sug); vegetables, fruits and nuts (hort); other crops (crops); plant fibres (oagr)
Livestock and meat
beef cattle (cattle); other grazing animals such as sheep,goats,horses (othctl),
wool (wol); pigs (pigpls), poultry (pltry); raw milk (milk); cattle meat (bfmt);
meat from other grazing animals (othcmt), pork meat (othmt), poultry meat
(pulmt); dairy (dairy)
Other food and beverages
sugar processing (sugar); rice processing (pcr); vegetable oils and fats, including
crude vegetable oil (vol)1; fishing (fish); aqua culture (aqcu), fish processing
(fishp), other food and beverages (ofd)
Supplying food system
industries
fertiliser (fert), crude vegetable oil by-product oilcake (oilcake); fish meal (fishm),
animal feed (feed), chemicals, rubbers and plastics—pesticides (othcrp);
1st generation bioethanol by-product distillers dried grains and solubles (ddgs)
Other sectors Various industry (including biofuels), transport and service sectors
39
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
2.2.2. MAGNET Production Structure Assumptions
Assumptions on the extent to which inputs can be substituted with each other are a key driver
of price and thus food system developments. Production in any of the MAGNET sectors listed
in Table 2 are modelled using flexible, multilevel nested Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES)
production functions allowing for substitution of different primary production factors (land, labour,
capital and natural resources) and intermediate production factors like energy, fertilisers and animal
feed components. In primary agriculture, the production tree is more complicated than in the rest of
the economy to be able to capture agricultural intensification processes.
The production structure for arable and horticultural sectors comprises four composite levels or
nests (Appendix A, Figure A1). In the upper nest, intermediate consumption and value added are
combined in fixed proportions (the corresponding elasticity of substitution is zero (the substitution
elasticity values are based on GTAP)). This captures the idea that certain intermediate inputs like seeds
are always needed and cannot be substituted by for example labour. One level down the value-added
composite consists of a land-fertilizer bundle and the remaining production factors bundle, with
substitution elasticity close to zero (0.1) (the choice for very low substitution elasticity is based on
simulations made in the past where we observed that low substitution elasticities produce more
plausible simulation results [23]), suggesting that that there is limited substitution between the inputs.
The substitution between land and fertilizer is further defined on the third level, with the elasticity
at 0.75, respecting the assumption that it is easier to substitute for inputs that are on a lower level of
production structure where inputs are more similar. Because the substitution elasticity is less than 1,
the factors behave as complements—an increasing demand for land will tend to increase demand for
fertilizer but since the elasticity is not zero land can be substituted for fertilizer. This limited scope for
substitution captures the fact that the chemical fertilizers in the MAGNET fertilizer sector can reduce
but not fully replace the use of land.
The production tree for the livestock sector is similar to crops (Appendix A, Figure A2) but
combines land with feed, which is further composed of concentrated feed and feed from different crop
sectors. Again assuming (imperfect) complements rather than substitutes (elasticity is <1) allows
limited scope for intensifying livestock production by substituting land with feed. Finally, the
production structure in food processing sectors as well as the remaining industry and services consists
of only 2 levels (Appendix A, Figure A3). The production tree has only one nest (following GTAP),
assuming that all production factors have the same substitution elasticity which is higher than 1,
suggesting that the factors behave as substitutes while the bundle of factors behaves as a perfect
complement to all intermediate inputs (elasticity of 0 in the top nest).
2.2.3. MAGNET Labour and Land Availability
Assumptions of production functions determine the food production responses to input price
changes. Availability of factors, notably labour and land, affect the extent to which sectors need to
compete with each other which is reflected by changing wages and land prices.
Modelling of labour markets in MAGNET reflects the presence of rent and wage differentials
between agricultural and non-agricultural sectors [27]. This study adopts the assumption that unskilled
labour cannot move freely between agriculture and the rest of the economy. However, within the
agricultural sector, skilled and unskilled labour behave as perfect substitutes. The market for skilled
labour is not segmented and skilled labour is free to move in all sectors in the economy. This modelling
assumption is adopted in the light of a projected increase of skills endowment in Nigeria. Allowing
more educated labour to be employed elsewhere increases the absorption capacity of the projected
boost of skills in the economy, where at the moment 70% of skilled labour is employed in services.
Availability and thus price of land in MAGNET is determined by the change in total agricultural
land and the ease with which land can move between agricultural sectors. Total agricultural land
supply is not fixed in MAGNET but a function of the real land price. If prices increase, more land
is taken into cultivation, but the closer to the upper limit of land potentially suitable for agriculture
40
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
the more costly land becomes. This land supply module captures that accessible and fertile lands
are taken into cultivation first and the further one expands agricultural land, the more costly the
conversion becomes. The price elasticity of land supply for all countries in MAGNET has recently been
estimated [28]. In Nigeria, the elasticity is set at 0.07, which is lower than for instance in Ethiopia (0.22),
and which reflects the rigidity of the land market as well as the limited possibility of further expansion
of land in Nigeria.
The land allocation module in MAGNET then allocates total agricultural land as a heterogeneous
production factor (e.g., having different biophysical characteristics) depending on the commodity
produced by a specific sector. This means that different land types cannot be perfectly substituted and
that adjustment costs are involved when land moves from one sector to the other. This is modelled
by using a constant elasticity of transformation (CET) function (for a schematic representation of the
CET land function, see Appendix A, Figure A4). Effectively, the land allocation module assumes that
it is easier to reallocate land within the group of cereals, oilseed and protein crops (COP) activities
(NEST 3), while greater adjustment costs are assumed to enable land to move out of COP production
into, say, horticultural activities.
2.3. Extension of MAGNET for Modelling Nutrients Supply using the GENUS Database
A key strength of MAGNET is its modular structure which allows the user to easily activate those
modules of most relevance to the study at hand. In this case, the study makes use of the MAGNET
extension to incorporate the Global Expanded Nutrients Supply (GENUS) database [29]. The GENUS
database provides macro and micronutrient data for 225 products in 175 countries, including Nigeria.
GENUS allows to disentangle the nutritional aspects of food supply—both in terms of the numerous
nutritional indicators, and in terms of a much more detailed food composition (see Appendix B,
Table A2 for the nutritional indicators in Nigeria in the Base year). The GENUS database combines the
FAO food balance sheets (FBS) with trade data and food compositional tables to construct a global
and historical food and nutrient supply database. From the estimates of the domestic food supply
in the FBS, the edible food supply is obtained after taking into account slaughtering, peeling, etc.
Using region-specific composition tables, nutrient supply is derived and provided at a 95% confidence
interval (median, low and upper bounds). See Appendix B, Table A2 for the estimated range of
the nutrient supply for Nigeria. In the MAGNET GENUS extension, the individual GENUS food
items are mapped to MAGNET commodities. Changes in the growth of quantities demanded by
household as modelled by MAGNET are used to update the nutritional indicators in the GENUS data,
resulting in consistent assessments of food and nutrient availability for the representative household in
MAGNET [21]. In the model version applied in this paper, a single representative household is used.
It is important to make a cross-validation of the nutritional data with other sources in the literature
(Table 3). Brouwer et al. (2018) explore food and nutrient intake at the household level based on
the General Household Survey (GHS) for Nigeria [30]. The GHS is a survey in the format of the
World Bank’s Living Standard Measurement Study—Integrated Surveys on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA).
It collects data on agricultural practices, socio-economic characteristics of households and communities
in a nationally representative sample of 5000 households [31]. Brouwer et al. report average daily
caloric consumption from GHS for households in adult female equivalents, which is approximately
20% lower than the usual average adult equivalent. The study of Akerele (2015) computes per
capita adult equivalents per rural and urban population, based on the most recent national food
consumption and nutrition survey (FCNS) in 2003–04 [32]. In Aromolaran (2010), the caloric data are
based on the author’s survey of 480 households from semirural areas of south-western Nigeria [33].
When comparing across these sources, it is apparent that all agree on a high share of carbohydrates in
the diets (above 60%). Cassava is one of the most important sources of carbohydrates in the Nigerian
diet. The GENUS database estimates the average intake of cassava of about 280 g of per day, which
is similar to the data collected in a local survey [34]. It is also noted that in Aromolaran, where data
41
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
comes from a specific region, the share of roots and tubers is even much higher than in the national
surveys (56% of total consumption).
Table 3. Structure of caloric consumption in Nigeria by food group, across various resources.
Database (Year), Source
Database GENUS (2011) General household
survey (2015–16)
National FCNS
(2003–04)
Rural South-west
Nigeria
Source Smith et al. (2016) Brouwer et al. (2018) Akerele (2015) Aromolaran (2010)
Cereals 41.7% 39.5% 42.0% 17.0%
Roots and tubers 26.8% 27.9% 24.0% 56.0%
Cereals, roots and tubers 68.5% 67.4% 66.0% 73.0%
Sugar 3.4% 1.9% 0.5% 0.6%
Legumes 2.8% 6.9% 10.0% 7.5%
Seeds and nuts 4.8% 1.5% 1.7% x
Vegetables 1.8% 1.2% 2.5% 2.90%
Fruits 3.5% 2.0% 0.3% 1.35%
Fruits and vegetables 5.3% 3.2% 2.8% 4.3%
Tea coffee 0.0% 0.0% 0.1% 0.63%
Spices 0.4% 0.2% x x
Alcohol 2.1% 0.2% 0.1% x
Meat 1.4% 2.1% 1.6% 0.8%
Milk 0.2% 0.6% 0.5% 0.4%
Fish 0.7% 1.9% 5% 1.2%
Eggs 0.4% 0.2% 0.1% 0.4%
Eggs, meat and milk 2.7% 4.7% 7.2% 2.8%
Fats and oils 9.9% 13.8% 9.0% 10.0%
Total 100% 100% 97% 99%
Caloric consumption 2969 2346 (2815) * 2440 1980 **
Note: Categories not reported in the respective sources are marked with x.* GHS data converted to male equivalent.
** Calculated from the statistical regression tables provided by the author. Aggregated food groups are in bold.
It is not straightforward to compare the total caloric consumption across the sources due to
differences in the definitions and measurement. The total caloric consumption expressed in female
adult equivalent is 2346 Kcal. When converted to male adult equivalent (2815 Kcal), it is close to the
caloric consumption reported in the GENUS database (2969 Kcal per capita). However, it is important
to note that the GENUS database measures available caloric supply or availability derived from
food balances, whereas the nutritional surveys measure the direct caloric intake by households and
individuals. To reflect this in our caloric projections, a correction factor to the GENUS caloric data is
applied to downscale the caloric availability to intake by average female equivalent reported in the
GHS analysis, which is considered the most representative, given that the data from Akerele is based
nutritional surveys from 2003–2004 and Aromolaran provides nutritional data from a single region.
In addition to the caloric composition, it is also insightful to compare the nutritional adequacy
of GENUS with other sources. A ratio of nutrient intake to the recommended average intake is
calculated and compared with the GENUS nutritional data converted to the female equivalent intake.
Table 4 shows that the nutrient adequacy is very similar in both data sources and fat, riboflavin,
iron and calcium are the most deficient nutrients in Nigeria. On the other hand, the intake of other
micronutrients such as vitamin A, B6 and vitamin C is sufficient. However, it is important to note that
even when the average intake exceeds the recommended dose, due to variation in incomes and diet
patterns, there are households that do not meet the requirements.
42
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
Table 4. Micro and macronutrient deficiency calculated as ratio of a nutrient intake to average
recommended intake (expressed per adult female equivalent).
GENUS (2011) General Household Survey
(2015–2016)
Nutrients meeting recommendations Thiamine 2.9 3.4
Vitamin A 1.8 3.2
Vitamin B6 1.8 2.0
Folate 1.5 1.7
Protein 1.4 1.5
Niacin 1.2 1.2
Vitamin C 2.2 1.1
Zinc 1.0 1.0
Nutrients not meeting recommendations Fat 0.7 0.8
Riboflavin 0.7 0.7
Iron 0.7 0.7
Calcium 0.4 0.6
2.4. Quantified Drivers of Food Systems Change in Nigeria
To build the foresight on national food systems, the paper follows the scheme presented in the
previous section. From the modelling perspective, this means adopting various choices on how the
key national drivers of the food systems will evolve in the future. After specifying this, it will be able
to assess how the impact of these drivers will affect future food systems and determine the important
limitations and opportunities for Nigeria.
The first considered driver is the GDP growth. After 2000, Nigeria enjoyed a decade of favourable
economic growth with average annual rates around 8%. Right before the recent crisis, the economy
was growing about 5% p.a. [1]. Such high rates, which result in doubling total GDP in only about
10 years, are in line with Solow’s theory of economic growth that expects that countries with an initially
low level of capital stock grow faster to accumulate new capital. If Nigeria sustained such growth rates
into the future, it could easily step up to a higher income level category. However, the recent economic
crisis has also revealed some of the bottlenecks of the economy, which are a high dependence on the oil
sector, an overvaluation of the exchange rate and armed conflict [35]. This means that the favourable
projections of GDP growth are conditional on resolving some of the weaknesses.
To translate the expected economic performance into our MAGNET model, there are several
established international macroeconomic forecasts, such as theWorld Bank [36] and IMF Economic
Outlooks [37]. However, these forecasts extend only into the closest future (not far beyond 2020) and
therefore they are not suitable for long-term projections beyond 2020. For instance, the extrapolation
of the IMF forecast beyond 2022 would be biased downwards due to the effect of the recent crisis
(see Figure 1). The shared socioeconomic pathways (SSP) projections [38] are commonly used in
foresight modelling exercises because of their long-term span and underlying future storylines.
However, the projected GDP growth rates in the SSP2 Middle of the Road scenario (Figure 2) seem to
be very optimistic, expecting that Nigeria could reach up to 12,000 GDP per capita by 2050, which is
at the edge of an upper middle income economy (comparable to Russian Federation or Turkey) [39].
Optimistic, but not that extreme are the projections of the PWC outlook to 2050, which assume that
Nigeria would reach about 4500 GDP per capita by 2050, belonging to the group of upper-middle
income economies, comparable for instance to Albania [40]. For this MAGNET analysis, the PWC
scenario is chosen, which reckons with optimistic but moderate GDP growth (4–5% annually until 2050).
This choice is in line with other studies; a recent study uses an assumption of 5% growth for the
periods until 2030 [16]. Adopting the PWC scenario therefore assumes a transition of Nigeria from
lower-middle income to an upper-middle-income economy.
43
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
􀏬
􀏮􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏰􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏲􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏴􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏭􀏬􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏭􀏮􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏭􀏵􀏲􀏬 􀏭􀏵􀏳􀏬 􀏭􀏵􀏴􀏬 􀏭􀏵􀏵􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏬􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏮􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏯􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏰􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬
􀁨􀁞􀀘
􀁗􀁴􀀒 􀁞􀁞􀁗􀏮 􀀯􀁄􀀦􀀃􀍾􀄞􀇆􀆚􀆌􀄂􀆉􀅽􀅯􀍘􀍿 􀀜􀁚􀁞 􀀃􀀬􀅝􀆐􀆚􀅽􀆌􀅝􀄐􀄂􀅯􀐽􀁴􀀑􀀃􀍾􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏴􀍲􀏮􀏬􀏮􀏬􀍿
Figure 2. Historical and projected GDP per capita in Nigeria (compilation of sources).
Another key driver for the long-term modelling is the population growth. In this case,
the SSP2 projections are based on the UN population growth projections (the medium variant).
Figure 3 shows that due to the growth rate exceeding 2% p.a., population will double in Nigeria by
2050. High population growth is also expected in other Sub-Saharan Africa regions, whereas in the EU
and other high income countries, the growth is limited.
􀏲􀏴􀏲 􀏳􀏲􀏳
􀏵􀏯􀏬
􀏭􀍕􀏬􀏵􀏭
􀏭􀍕􀏮􀏯􀏴
􀏭􀏴􀏭
􀏮􀏬􀏰
􀏮􀏱􀏱
􀏯􀏭􀏰
􀏯􀏳􀏲
􀏬
􀏮􀏬􀏬
􀏰􀏬􀏬
􀏲􀏬􀏬
􀏴􀏬􀏬
􀏭􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏭􀍕􀏮􀏬􀏬
􀏭􀍕􀏰􀏬􀏬
􀏭􀍕􀏲􀏬􀏬
􀏭􀍕􀏴􀏬􀏬
􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏱 􀏮􀏬􀏮􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏯􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏰􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬
􀅵􀅝􀅯􀅯􀅝􀅽􀅶􀀃􀅝􀅶􀅚􀄂􀄏􀅝􀆚􀄂􀅶􀆚􀆐
􀁚􀄞􀆐􀆚􀀃􀁞􀆵􀄏􀍲􀁞􀄂􀅚􀄂􀆌􀄂􀅶􀀃􀀄􀄨􀆌􀅝􀄐􀄂 􀁅􀅝􀅐􀄞􀆌􀅝􀄂
􀏭􀏬􀏴􀐹
􀏴􀏬􀐹
􀀧􀆌􀅽􀇁􀆚􀅚􀀃
􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏱􀍲􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬
Figure 3. Projected population growth in Nigeria and the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa.
High population growth brings pressure on resources but it can also be an opportunity as a country
can benefit from the abundance of labour force. The ratio of skilled and unskilled population will
be important for cashing from the demographic dividend—whether the expected mix of skills will
find a place in the labour market. In order to translate this into MAGNET, the Wittgenstein labour
projections [41] are used. Figure 4 shows that at present, the number of unskilled labour slightly
exceeds the number of skilled people in the economy. By 2050, it is expected that the share of skilled
labour will reach 70%, up from 40% now, which is comparable with the EU (77%).
44
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
􀏭􀏯􀏱􀍕􀏱􀏮􀏰
􀏭􀏵􀏰􀍕􀏮􀏭􀏭
􀏵􀏴􀍕􀏭􀏲􀏮
􀏰􀏲􀏲􀍕􀏮􀏵􀏭
􀏱􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏭􀏬􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏭􀏱􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏮􀏬􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏮􀏱􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏯􀏬􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏯􀏱􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏰􀏬􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏰􀏱􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏱􀏬􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏱 􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬
􀅵􀅝􀅯􀅯􀅝􀅽􀅶􀀃􀅝􀅶􀅚􀄂􀄏􀅝􀆚􀄂􀅶􀆚􀆐
􀁨􀅶􀁞􀅬􀀾􀄂􀄏 􀁞􀅬􀀾􀄂􀄏
􀏰􀏮􀐹
􀏳􀏭􀐹
Figure 4. Projections of skilled and unskilled labour force in Nigeria.
The dynamic economic and population growth that is projected into the future will put
tremendous pressures on natural resources in order to feed the existing population. Therefore, it is
important to take into account the availability of agricultural land for further expansion. As pointed
out in the PWC Report on Nigeria’s agricultural value chains [42], most of the agricultural growth in
the past has been driven by area expansion, with limited contribution of yield growth. This suggests
that there is only a limited proportion of land that could yet be brought to cultivation. The estimations
from the IMAGE model provide an overview of actual land available that can be used for commercial
purposes (e.g., crop land and pasture land versus parks) across the world [2]. Figure 5 shows that
already, 93% of available agricultural land is occupied. This is because out of the total 79 million ha
of available agricultural land, 70 million ha are being cultivated, from which about 40 million ha are
arable land and the rest are pastures and other agricultural land (Table 5). This implies that the only
way how to increase land use comes from a conversion of the extensively used pasture land to arable
land. Indeed, various literature sources claim that about 40% of agricultural land can still be put in
cultivation [42–44]. However, it must be noted that these claims are only feasible by transforming the
existing land use, not by adding more land into cultivation. In addition to this, there are also economic
barriers to land access. Administrative procedures for acquiring new agricultural land in Nigeria may
be cumbersome and have been put forward as a major bottleneck in the food supply system [42,45].
􀏵􀏳􀐹
􀏵􀏬􀐹 􀏴􀏳􀐹
􀏴􀏮􀐹 􀏴􀏬􀐹 􀏳􀏴􀐹
􀏳􀏯􀐹
􀏲􀏳􀐹 􀏲􀏳􀐹
􀏲􀏭􀐹
􀏰􀏱􀐹 􀏰􀏯􀐹 􀏰􀏮􀐹
􀏬􀐹
􀏭􀏬􀐹
􀏮􀏬􀐹
􀏯􀏬􀐹
􀏰􀏬􀐹
􀏱􀏬􀐹
􀏲􀏬􀐹
􀏳􀏬􀐹
􀏴􀏬􀐹
􀏵􀏬􀐹
􀏭􀏬􀏬􀐹
􀁅􀀄􀀦􀁚􀀯􀀒􀀄 􀁅􀀧􀀄 􀀄􀁗􀁤􀀄 􀁚􀁋􀁴 􀀑􀀧􀀘 􀀯􀁅􀀘􀀯􀀄 􀁅􀀄􀀦􀁤􀀄 􀀜􀁨 􀁞􀁞􀀄 􀀾􀀄􀁄 􀀜􀁤􀀬 􀁳􀁅􀁄 􀀜􀀄􀁞
Figure 5. Land pressure in MAGNET countries (% of occupied land in total agricultural land) in the
base year.
45
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
Table 5. Land use and land potential in Nigeria (2011).
Land Type Land Used for
Agriculture (Million ha)
Land Suitable for Agriculture
(Million ha)
Arable land 41 -
Pastures & other 30 -
Total agricultural land 71 -
Land suitable for agriculture (based on IMAGE) - 79
Available land for expansion - 8
Land pressure (% of land used or left) 90% 10%
Source: land use (MAGNET database), land potential (IMAGE model).
2.5. Definition of Alternative Baselines
It is becoming apparent that Nigeria will soon approach food production limits if non-land inputs
are not used more intensively or if there is not a significant change in R&D policy that would boost
the crop and animal sector yields. According to FAO, the potential cassava yield is 40 tonnes per
hectare, whereas the achieved yield in Nigeria is only 13 tonnes per hectare [46]. Although the SSP2
projections of yields towards 2050 taken from the IMAGE database [47] assume an annual yield growth
of about 1%, which is well above the high income countries, it is not enough to make a significant
difference in closing the yield gap with the high income countries. At the moment, Nigeria is one of
the countries with the lowest use of fertilizer input to land use (Figure 6). Nigerian farmers utilise on
average about 10 kg of fertilizer per hectare, which is very little compared to high income countries
such as Netherlands, where the consumption is well above 200 kg [48]. In Nigeria, poor infrastructure
increases transportation costs that make fertilizer prices unaffordable [49]. Moreover, in the interaction
with poor quality of seeds, the productivity impact of fertilizer has its limits [50].
􀏬
􀏬􀍘􀏬􀏱
􀏬􀍘􀏭
􀏬􀍘􀏭􀏱
􀏬􀍘􀏮
􀏬􀍘􀏮􀏱
􀏬􀍘􀏯
􀀜􀁨 􀀾􀀄􀁄 􀁅􀀄􀀦􀁤􀀄 􀀄􀁗􀁤􀀄 􀀑􀀧􀀘 􀁅􀀄􀀦􀁚􀀯􀀒􀀄 􀁳􀁅􀁄 􀁞􀁞􀀄 􀁚􀁋􀁴 􀀯􀁅􀀘􀀯􀀄 􀀜􀀄􀁞 􀀜􀁤􀀬 􀁅􀀧􀀄
Figure 6. Ratio of fertilizer to land input use in nominal terms (USD) in MAGNET database.
In order to reflect the need for the input intensification in our modelling approach, two foresight
scenarios are designed. The first scenario Land_Fixed is the “status quo” scenario that counts with
high rigidity in the land market where an increasing demand for food driven by GDP and population
growth will not be able to respond either by higher land expansion or by more intensive use of
other factors. The alternative scenario Land_Subs incorporates features of institutional change where
increasingly higher land scarcity is adjusted by substituting land for non-land inputs such that they
are used more intensively in the production process (Table 6). This is operationalized by increasing the
substitution elasticity between land and other inputs both in crops and land-using livestock sectors
(corresponding to nest 1 in the Figures A1 and A2). In addition, a higher substitution elasticity between
land and feed in the livestock sector and land and fertilizer in the crops sector (nest 3 in Figures A1
and A2) is set. The final choice of parameters is in Table 4. Both scenario versions can be considered
as extreme, where under the substitution elasticity of 0.1, which is the default option in MAGNET,
46
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
there is almost no room for substituting land for other inputs. With the elasticity of 1.2, the inputs
behave as substitutes and an increasingly scarcer land can be easily substituted for labour, capital
and other inputs. We have performed a sensitivity analysis to assess the response to various levels
of substitution elasticity ranging from 0.1 (MAGNET default) to 1.2, which are the upper and lower
bounds. The land pressure is notably decreased with substitution elasticities above 0.4.
Table 6. Overview of the alternative baseline scenarios.
Key Assumptions LAND_FIXED LAND_SUBS
Technical change Exogenous—calibrated to GDP growth based on 4–5% p.a.
GDP growth Endogenous
Population Growth SSP2 (UN Medium Variant)
Exogenous Yield growth 1% p.a. based on SSP2
Feed efficiency improvements in
livestock sectors 1–2% p.a. based on IMAGE
CES Substitution elasticity of NEST 1
(land bundle -other factors) 0.1 (MAGNET) 1.2
CES Substitution elasticity of NEST 3
(land-fertilizer or land-feed)
0.75 land-fertilizer, 0.5
land-feed
1.2 both land-fertilizer and
land-feed
Land allocation elasticity
−0.2 (NEST1), −0.4 (NEST2),
−0.6 (NEST3) 1 (Non-nested)
Another way to mobilize the land market is to allow more flexible conversion between crop land
and pastures on the existing land, which makes it easier to increase the share of arable land at the
expense of pastures. To operationalize this in MAGNET, a flat land allocation tree is imposed where
all types of lands can be perfectly substituted and set the CET elasticity to 1. From the institutional
point of view, both measures mean that there is a better mobility of land both for acquiring and for
getting rid of.
3. Results
3.1. Agricultural Inputs and Factor Markets
The analysis starts by looking at the agricultural input and factor markets because they
directly reveal the pressures or abundance of resources driven by the combination of economic
and population growth. First, it is interesting to see what happens with the land prices under
both scenarios. Figure 7 shows that if there is no possibility to substitute land for other inputs,
land prices will escalate after 2030 due to increasing demand for food. Particularly in the last period,
land price growth is enormous, suggesting a real difficulty to meet the demands for food with limited
resources. This adverse development could be almost fully avoided if other inputs are used more
intensively (Land_Subs scenario). In this case, land prices remain on the same level as in the base year.
Table A3 (Appendix C) shows the comparison of annual growth of factor prices for all production
factors. As defined in the scenario framework, in the Land_Fixed scenario land is the key constraining
factor in agricultural production, with annual growth of prices reaching up to 13%, particularly
in the last two decades. For the other production factors, prices would go down. The difficulties
of substituting land for other factors creates a situation where other resources in agriculture are
under-utilized and their returns are lower. Particularly, the wages of unskilled labour would go down
in primary agriculture. This is related to the fact that the agricultural sector is the most labour intensive
sector in the Nigerian economy and the largest employer of unskilled labour (over 70% of unskilled
labour works in agriculture). Any decline of agricultural production would be reflected in a decline of
agricultural wages.
47
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
􀏭
􀏭􀏭
􀏮􀏭
􀏯􀏭
􀏰􀏭
􀏱􀏭
􀏲􀏭
􀏳􀏭
􀏴􀏭
􀏵􀏭
􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏭 􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏱 􀏮􀏬􀏮􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏯􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏰􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬
􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚 􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐
Figure 7. Growth of land price index per scenario. (2011 = 1).
On the other hand, in the Land_Subs scenario, the relative prices of non-land factors decline less
notably or even increase (unskilled labour in the rest of the economy). Compared to the Land_Fixed
scenario, in 2050, in the primary agriculture, wages of both skilled and unskilled labour would be 60%
higher and land prices about 100% lower. This results in a very different composition of value added
in both scenarios. In 2011, food system has the largest share in the real value added (41%), followed
by industry and services (25%). By 2050, the contribution of food system to the real value added is
projected to decline in favour of services and industry, from 41% to 23–28% depending on the scenario
(Appendix C, Figure A5). If land remains fixed, the share of food system in total value-added declines
more rapidly than in the Land_Subs scenario. On the other hand, it is apparent that the Land_Fixed
scenario supports more industrialization of the economy as industry benefits from the absorption of
resources from agriculture. The increase of the oil & gas sector’s share in the land substitution scenario
is driven by increased foreign demand, provoked by more competitive oil and gas export prices in
Nigeria compared to the rest of the world.
It is also instructive to analyse the impact of the land market scenarios on the changes in
economy-wide factor demand. Table 7 compares the endowment volumes between the two scenarios.
It is apparent that with more land substitution, the agricultural sector utilizes more inputs, including
the land itself (the total primary agriculture production goes up and therefore also land). This is
also transmitted to the sector of food processing where all endowments increase compared to the
Land_Fixed scenario. On the other hand, locking land in agriculture releases labour and capital
to be employed in industry and therefore there is more value added created in industry in the
Land_Fixed scenario. This is especially visible in case of skilled labour. The resulting impact on the
demand for labour and capital in the individual food systems sectors is displayed in Appendix C,
Table A4. The conclusion that stems from this analysis is that better management of land markets
could potentially be a strong leverage point for inclusive growth in food systems activities, yet with
a trade-off in terms of industrial development. This trade-off appears in classical theories of rural
development, and has been a subject of increasing criticism [49].
Table 7. Endowment volumes growth in Land_Subs in 2050 (% difference from Land_Fixed scenario)
by sector in the economy.
Sector Description Code Land Unskilled Labour Skilled Labour Capital
Primary agriculture AGRI_PRIM 1.3 2.5 85.4 17.3
Food processing AGRI_proc 4.1 0.5 36.4
Industry (non-food) INDUSTRY −38.2 −42.2 −11.6
Services and utilities SERV&UTIL 7.0 1.2 8.9
48
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
3.2. Price Transmission in the Food Supply Chain
The developments in the factor markets are transmitted into markets of goods and services.
For this analysis, it is interesting to see what the expected price trends in the food supply chain are
towards 2050 and how they are affected by the rigidity of land markets. Figure 8 shows the development
of prices in the primary agriculture sector. The land constraint is a key factor in determining whether
primary agricultural prices will grow or decline. The tipping point is the period after 2020 when there
will be no available land to cultivate. Because of this, prices in primary agriculture would be 5 times
higher by 2050. Releasing pressure on land would make a significant difference in the production costs
of primary agriculture. In this case, producer prices would decline by 2050.
􀏬􀍘􀏬
􀏭􀍘􀏬
􀏮􀍘􀏬
􀏯􀍘􀏬
􀏰􀍘􀏬
􀏱􀍘􀏬
􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏭 􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏱 􀏮􀏬􀏮􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏯􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏰􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬
􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚 􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐
Figure 8. Index of primary agriculture prices in the two scenarios.
Figure 9 shows how the development on land market is transmitted to other sectors and to final
consumers. Clearly, in the Land_Fixed scenario, the growth of land prices is so dominant, that all
connecting industries face higher production costs, resulting in an increase of food prices for consumers.
On the other hand, with a higher land substitutability, producer prices would go down as well as
consumer prices of food. The fact that consumer food prices copy more closely the development of
primary rather than processed food suggests that the proportion of consumer spending coming from
primary agriculture is higher than from processed industry (about 50% of all food expenditures come
from land-using sectors such as horticulture and grain). It also tells that there is a low share of imports
in food consumption that could potentially moderate the food price inflation (the share of food imports
in total food expenditures is 8% and is stable over time and across the scenario).
􀏭􀏮􀍘􀏵
􀏬􀍘􀏮
􀏱􀍘􀏭
􀍲􀏮􀍘􀏮
􀏮􀍘􀏯
􀍲􀏭􀍘􀏰
􀏯􀍘􀏴
􀍲􀏭􀍘􀏴
􀍲􀏰
􀍲􀏮
􀏬
􀏮
􀏰
􀏲
􀏴
􀏭􀏬
􀏭􀏮
􀏭􀏰
􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚 􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐
􀀯􀅶􀆉􀆵􀆚􀀃􀀾􀀄􀁅􀀘 􀁗􀆌􀅽􀄚􀆵􀄐􀄞􀆌􀀃􀀄􀀧􀁚􀀯􀍺􀁗􀁚􀀯􀁄 􀁗􀆌􀅽􀄚􀆵􀄐􀄞􀆌􀀃􀀄􀀧􀁚􀀯􀍺􀆉􀆌􀅽􀄐 􀀒􀅽􀅶􀆐􀆵􀅵􀄞􀆌􀀃􀀦􀁋􀁋􀀘
Figure 9. Annual growth of prices between 2020–2050.
49
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
It is also interesting to see how the developments in the agri-food markets affect prices in the
other industries (Appendix C, Figure A6). Whereas agri-food prices would be significantly higher in
the Land_Fixed scenario, producer prices in the other production sectors would decline more than
in the Land_Subs scenario. If there is no substitution of labour for land, the surplus of labour from
the agricultural sector pushes the wages down. Particularly the sector of services benefits from this,
which is the largest employer of skilled labour. In industry, the stronger decline of prices in the
Land_Fixed scenario is driven by capital prices. There is again a higher surplus of capital from the
food processing sector that is allocated in the rest of the economy.
3.3. Domestic Production, Trade and Value Added
This section looks more closely into the performance of individual agri-food production systems.
Figure 10 displays annual growth of production volume of the commodities that represent 99% of
total production in 2020 (both in volume and value). The level of production in 2020 is also presented
to understand the importance of each sector in the total agri-food complex. It is observed that in the
Land_Fixed scenario, meat processing sectors such as poultry meat, pork meat and other meat enjoy
unusual production volume growth reaching above 5% per year. On the other hand, in the Land_Subs
scenario, land-using sectors such as crops, other agriculture and horticulture flourish. Because the
Land_Subs scenario favours those agricultural sectors that have traditionally strong position in the
agri-food chain, the total agri-food production volume is higher in the Land_Subs scenario than in
Land_Fixed (note that of course, in value terms, it is the other way around).
􀏴􀏬􀏬
􀏭􀏬􀍕􀏴􀏬􀏬
􀏮􀏬􀍕􀏴􀏬􀏬
􀏯􀏬􀍕􀏴􀏬􀏬
􀏰􀏬􀍕􀏴􀏬􀏬
􀏱􀏬􀍕􀏴􀏬􀏬
􀏲􀏬􀍕􀏴􀏬􀏬
􀏳􀏬􀍕􀏴􀏬􀏬
􀏴􀏬􀍕􀏴􀏬􀏬
􀏵􀏬􀍕􀏴􀏬􀏬
􀏬
􀏭
􀏮
􀏯
􀏰
􀏱
􀏲
􀏳
􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚􀀃􀍾􀐹􀍿 􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐􀀃􀍾􀐹􀍿 􀁳􀄂􀅯􀆵􀄞􀀃􀅝􀅶􀀃􀏮􀏬􀏮􀏬􀀃􀍾􀅵􀅝􀅯􀅯􀅝􀅽􀅶􀀃􀁨􀁞􀀘􀍿
Figure 10. Annual growth of production volume (2020–2050) and volume of production of the
major commodities (production volume of sugar, milk, dairy, wheat and aquaculture are too small
to be reported).
The divergent development of the agri-food sectors is explained by the growth of production
costs and prices. Figure 11 shows that due to an excessive growth of land prices in the Land_Fixed
scenario, production costs in land-using sectors such as grain or cattle rise significantly (above 6% p.a.),
whereas the non-land agricultural sectors such as other meat, poultry and pigs face a decline of prices.
Concretely, prices in pigs and poultry sector reduce 5 times, whereas prices of cattle go up 10 times.
Due to these price developments, meat industry enjoys an increased competitiveness compared to
the crops sectors. Under the Land_Subs scenario, on the other hand, production costs in primary
agricultural sector are lower than in processing industry and the crops sectors expand.
50
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
􀍲􀏰􀍘􀏬
􀍲􀏮􀍘􀏬
􀏬􀍘􀏬
􀏮􀍘􀏬
􀏰􀍘􀏬
􀏲􀍘􀏬
􀏴􀍘􀏬
􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚 􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐
Figure 11. Annual growth of producer market prices of major agro-food commodities (2020–2050).
The projected changes in prices, endowments and productivity result in a very different
composition of value added in both scenarios. Food supply chain value in MAGNET is defined
as a sum of production value of primary agriculture, food processing, wild fish sector, aquaculture,
fish processing and fish meal, fertilizer, feed and pesticides. If land is substituted for other factors,
the value share of food processing and supplying industries increases, because producer prices and
costs in primary agriculture are comparatively lower than in food processing in this scenario. Under
the Land_Fixed scenario, due to the excessive growth of land prices, the value of food supply chain is
dominated even more strongly by primary agriculture.
The developments in the food systems sectors are also projected to have a strong impact on the
external position of Nigeria and the domestic supply and self-sufficiency. Figure 12 shows that the
land substitutability plays a significant role in the competitiveness of Nigeria on foreign agri-food
markets. Until 2020, trade balance remains stable and negative at around 20 billion USD. After 2020,
the trends diverge notably where under the Land_Fixed scenario, trade balance would deteriorate
significantly up to a negative 140 billion USD, whilst in Land_Subs scenario, it would improve to
a negative 11 billion USD.
􀍲􀏭􀏰􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀍲􀏭􀏮􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀍲􀏭􀏬􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀍲􀏴􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀍲􀏲􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀍲􀏰􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀍲􀏮􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏬
􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏭 􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏱 􀏮􀏬􀏮􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏯􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏰􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬
􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚 􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐
Figure 12. Agri-food trade balance expressed in world prices in million USD.
Aggregate agri-food trade balance is driven by the competitiveness of individual agri-food sectors.
In 2020, there are only few sectors which have a positive net trade with abroad, namely the sectors
of horticulture, grain and other crops, oils and wild fish (similar in both scenarios). By 2050, in the
Land-Fixed scenario, the trade balance in all these traditionally trade-oriented sectors would turn
negative (except for wild fish). There is also a very strong deterioration of trade balance in other
51
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
processed food (“ofd”), due to an increased household consumption of processed food from abroad.
On the other hand, there would be a new development on the meat markets, previewing a large
increase in net exports of poultry and other meat (driven by the relative decline of producer prices of
these sectors).
In the Land_Subs scenario, the competitiveness of crops sectors is improved and the deficit of
Nigeria’s trade balance is only moderate. The sectors that have a positive balance in 2020 remain
with surplus and other sectors such as beef meat and paddy rice newly gain competitiveness on
external markets.
3.4. Food Environment and Consumption
In this section, the attention shifts to the consumer side of the economy to assess the impact of the
projected changes in food production on households’ living standards and food security. Table 8 shows
that agri-food consumer prices are expected to increase by 4% in the Land_Fixed scenario, whereas in
the Land_Subs scenario, they decline by 1.8%. As a result of that, the quantity of food consumed is
higher in the second scenario. Due to excessive growth of food prices, private expenditures on food
grow quite significantly in the Land_Fixed scenario and they are also reflected in the growth of total
household expenditures. The lower panel in the table analyses food accessibility as the compounding
impact of food prices and household earnings, using a cereal price index divided by wage of skilled
and unskilled labour as an indicator. In the Land_Fixed scenario, the accessibility of staple food
such as cereals declines as the cereal price index is up to 7 times higher compared to the wage of
unskilled labour in agriculture, and 4 times higher compared to unskilled labour wage in other
industry. The relative accessibility of food is, on the other hand, increasing in the Land-Subs scenario,
where cereal prices are below the wages. Similar developments are recorded for the skilled labour,
which shows that food-security problems would be threatening both skilled and unskilled labour
households in the Land_Fixed scenario.
Table 8. Aggregate consumer prices and expenditures of Nigerian households.
(% annual growth, 2020–2050) Land_Fixed Land_Subs
Price index agri-food consumption 4.2 −1.8
Agri-food consumption quantity 2.0 2.4
Agri-food expenditures 6.3 0.6
Total Household Expenditures 5.6 2.6
(Ratio of cereal consumer price index to unskilled labour
wages, by sector of employment, 2050) Land_Fixed Land_Subs
Household employed in primary agriculture (2011 = 1) 6.89 0.52
Household employed in the rest of the economy (2011 = 1) 3.69 0.28
Given that agri-food expenditures grow significantly, it is interesting to see if the share of food
expenditures in total household expenditures increases as well (Appendix C, Figure A7). In the base
year (2011), the share of food expenditures in total expenditures in Nigeria is relatively high, reaching
almost 70%. This is in line with Akerele (2015), who highlights that expenditure on food claimed more
than 60% of household income in 2012. In the Land_Subs scenario, the share of food expenditures after
2020 declines to 30%, whereas in the Land_Fixed scenario, due to excessive growth of prices, the share
of food expenditures is expected to exceed 80%. Basically, most household income would be spent on
food in this case, which is alarming.
In the Land_Fixed scenario, the food groups that contribute most to total food expenditures
are horticulture and other crops, cereals, red meat and other food (Figure 13). Contrary to that,
in the Land_Subs scenario, the expenditures growth remains very moderate, except for milk & dairy,
sugar and processed food, which are food groups with lower share in total expenditures.
52
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
􀏬
􀏭􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏮􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏯􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏰􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏱􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏲􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏳􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏴􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏵􀏬􀍕􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀏬􀍘􀏬
􀏭􀍘􀏬
􀏮􀍘􀏬
􀏯􀍘􀏬
􀏰􀍘􀏬
􀏱􀍘􀏬
􀏲􀍘􀏬
􀏳􀍘􀏬
􀏴􀍘􀏬
􀏵􀍘􀏬
􀅚􀅽􀆌􀆚􀎘􀅽􀄐􀆌􀅽􀆉􀆐 􀄐􀄞􀆌􀄞􀄂􀅯􀆐 􀆌􀄞􀄚􀍺􀅵􀄞􀄂􀆚 􀁋􀁤􀀬􀀜􀁚􀍺􀀦􀁋􀁋􀀘 􀁳􀀜􀀧􀍺􀁋􀀯􀀾􀁞 􀇁􀅚􀅝􀆚􀄞􀍺􀅵􀄞􀄂􀆚 􀅵􀅝􀅯􀅬􀎘􀄚􀄂􀅝􀆌􀇇 􀆐􀆵􀅐􀎘􀆐􀆵􀅐􀄂􀆌 􀅯􀅝􀇀􀄞􀆐􀆚􀅽􀄐􀅬
􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚 􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐 􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏭
Figure 13. Annual growth of household expenditures on individual food groups (%, 2020–2050,
left-hand scale) and value of expenditures in 2011 (million USD, right-hand scale).
3.5. Nutrient Availability
In this section, the impact of the food system developments on household nutrition is analysed.
Using the GENUS database, the calories linked to the main food groups in MAGNET are traced.
A correction factor is applied to express the total caloric supply in terms of caloric intake of adult
female equivalent. Figure 14 shows that in the Land_Fixed scenario, the projected caloric consumption
would be in the range of 2600–2700 Kcal, which is about 100 Kcal more than in case of the Land_Subs
scenario (4% difference). This shows that improved food accessibility is not necessarily accompanied
by higher caloric consumption.
􀏮􀏯􀏬􀏬
􀏮􀏯􀏱􀏬
􀏮􀏰􀏬􀏬
􀏮􀏰􀏱􀏬
􀏮􀏱􀏬􀏬
􀏮􀏱􀏱􀏬
􀏮􀏲􀏬􀏬
􀏮􀏲􀏱􀏬
􀏮􀏳􀏬􀏬
􀏮􀏳􀏱􀏬
􀏮􀏬􀏮􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏯􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏰􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬
􀀾􀅽􀇁􀀃􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚 􀀾􀅽􀇁􀀃􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐 􀁄􀄞􀄚􀅝􀆵􀅵􀀃􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚
􀁄􀄞􀄚􀅝􀆵􀅵􀀃􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐 􀀬􀅝􀅐􀅚􀀃􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚 􀀬􀅝􀅐􀅚􀀃􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐
Figure 14. Projections of household caloric consumption (kcal per day) in the low, medium and high
variant (converted to adult female equivalent).
Figure 15 shows the composition of caloric consumption across main food groups. As mentioned
before, roots and tubers, grain and grain flour are the key sources of energy—they provide about
2000 Kcal out of 2900 Kcal of daily consumption. By 2050, these foods will remain the most important
caloric sources but there will be some differences depending on the scenario. In the Land_Fixed
scenario, due to a bigger role of food processing, the caloric consumption of more processed foods
such as grain flour, vegetable oils and sugar would be higher compared to Land_Subs. Given that
53
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
these foods have high caloric content, this explains why the caloric consumption is slightly higher in
the Land_Fixed scenario.
􀍲􀏮􀏬􀏬
􀏬
􀏮􀏬􀏬
􀏰􀏬􀏬
􀏲􀏬􀏬
􀏴􀏬􀏬
􀏭􀏬􀏬􀏬
􀁚􀅽􀅽􀆚􀆐􀀃􀄂􀅶􀄚
􀆚􀆵􀄏􀄞􀆌􀆐
􀀧􀆌􀄂􀅝􀅶􀆐 􀀧􀆌􀄂􀅝􀅶􀀃􀄨􀅯􀅽􀆵􀆌
􀍾􀆉􀆌􀅽􀄐􀄞􀆐􀆐􀄞􀄚􀍿
􀁳􀄞􀅐􀄞􀆚􀄂􀄏􀅯􀄞
􀅽􀅝􀅯􀆐
􀁳􀄞􀅐􀄞􀆚􀄂􀄏􀅯􀄞􀆐 􀁞􀆵􀅐􀄂􀆌 􀀦􀆌􀆵􀅝􀆚􀆐 􀀑􀄞􀇀􀄞􀆌􀄂􀅐􀄞􀆐 􀁚􀄞􀄚􀀃􀅵􀄞􀄂􀆚 􀁴􀅚􀅝􀆚􀄞
􀅵􀄞􀄂􀆚􀎘􀄨􀄂􀆚􀆐
􀀦􀅝􀆐􀅚 􀁄􀅝􀅯􀅬􀀃􀄂􀅶􀄚
􀄚􀄂􀅝􀆌􀇇
􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚􀍺􀏮􀏬􀏮􀏬 􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚􀍺􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬 􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐􀍺􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬 􀀘􀅝􀄨􀄨􀀃􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀆐􀆵􀄏􀆐􀀃􀇀􀆐􀀃􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀄨􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚
Figure 15. Projections of caloric consumption (kcal per capita day) per food group.
It is also important to assess whether the energetic consumption corresponds to a higher intake
of micronutrients. For instance, although in Land_Subs scenario the total caloric consumption is
slightly lower, the caloric intake from fruits and vegetables is higher, which is important from the
health perspective.
Figure 16 shows that nutritional intake is projected to increase for all deficient nutrients, except
for calcium, where projections diverge per scenario. In the Land_Fixed scenario, calcium intake would
decline by 1% compared to 2020, whereas in the Land_Subs scenario, nutrient intake increases to 8%
compared to 2020. Fifty per cent of calcium in Nigeria is obtained from cassava, yams, citruses and
okra. Because the Land_Subs scenario favours the horticulture and crops food systems, it also leads to
a higher intake of calcium. On the other hand, in the Land_Fixed scenario the intake of carbohydrates
and fats would be up to 23% higher than in 2020.
􀏰􀏮􀏯
􀏭􀏵􀏲
􀏱􀏵 􀏱􀏵 􀏲􀏳
􀏰􀏭􀏳
􀏮􀏮􀏬
􀏳􀏯 􀏳􀏯 􀏳􀏱
􀏰􀏱􀏴
􀏮􀏭􀏯
􀏲􀏯 􀏲􀏯 􀏳􀏮
􀏰􀏭
􀍲􀏳 􀍲􀏭􀏬 􀍲􀏭􀏬 􀍲􀏯
􀍲􀏭􀏬􀏬
􀏬
􀏭􀏬􀏬
􀏮􀏬􀏬
􀏯􀏬􀏬
􀏰􀏬􀏬
􀏱􀏬􀏬
􀀒􀄂􀅯􀄐􀅝􀆵􀅵 􀁞􀅽􀄚􀅝􀆵􀅵 􀀒􀄂􀆌􀄏 􀀦􀄂􀆚 􀁗􀆌􀅽􀆚􀄞􀅝􀅶
􀏮􀏬􀏮􀏬 􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚􀍺􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬 􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐􀍺􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬 􀀄􀄏􀆐􀅽􀅯􀆵􀆚􀄞􀀃􀄚􀅝􀄨􀄨􀀃􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚􀀃􀇀􀆐􀀃􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐
Figure 16. Overview of micronutrient intake in different scenarios (mg/capita/day or g/capita/day).
It is also important to look at how the nutrient gap evolves in time per scenario (Figure 17).
Clearly, the projected changes in nutrient intake are too small to make a significant improvement in
the nutrient gap. The exception is the intake of vitamin A, where the ratio could increase to 1.8 in the
54
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
Land_Fixed scenario. This is driven by a push in palm oil consumption which represents about 70% of
all vitamin A intake in Nigeria. On the other hand, the Land_Subs scenario would favour more the
intake of thiamine, vitamin C, vitamin B6 and folate. However, the calcium, fat, riboflavin and iron
would remain highly deficient in the Nigerian nutrition by 2050.
􀏬􀍘􀏬
􀏬􀍘􀏱
􀏭􀍘􀏬
􀏭􀍘􀏱
􀏮􀍘􀏬
􀏮􀍘􀏱
􀏯􀍘􀏬
􀏯􀍘􀏱
􀆌􀄂􀆚􀅝􀅽􀍺􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏭 􀆌􀄂􀆚􀅝􀅽􀀃􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚􀍺􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬 􀆌􀄂􀆚􀅝􀅽􀀃􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐􀍺􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬
Figure 17. Overview of micronutrient gap in 2011 and 2050. Note: ratio is calculated as a nutritional
intake divided by recommended dose. GENUS data is translated to female adult equivalent to
correspond to the recommended dose in LSMS-ISA.
4. Discussion
It was shown by means of a modelling exercise that structural change in agriculture and
transformation in the food system are important elements in diet change in Nigeria. The Nigerian
(agri-fish-) food system is undergoing substantial change under the influence of global and domestic
drivers, and model analysis gives insight into the processes of adjustment. Nigeria is currently the
country with the lowest level of input use in agriculture (in value terms) in the global database
that underpins the MAGNET model, and with a reserve of just 10% of agricultural land that can be
brought into production. Model projections suggest that a process of intensification of agriculture in
combination with land substitution appears critical for the evolution of food and nutrition security, and
for shifts towards healthy diets for the population. The strength of the analytical framework employed
in this study is its capability to account for economy-wide adjustments of producer and consumer
decisions under the influence of global drivers of change and the drivers related to the rigidity in
the land market. This no.1 feedback effect, as defined in the introduction, appears to be particularly
strong in relation to adjustments in factor markets for labour in response to the land rigidity scenarios
combined with economic growth and expansion of the population. A major assumption underpinning
the improved food accessibility and shifts towards greater diversity and quality in the diet under the
Land_Subs scenario stems from adjustments in the labour market. In particular, the model projects that
unskilled agricultural employment grows by over 2%, and skilled labour by over 80%, suggesting that
skilled work becomes firmly established in the agriculture sector. This is a substantial departure from
today’s realities, in which farming is predominantly a low-input activity. More detailed assessments
will need to be done to assess confidence whether the Nigerian labour market would support such
a transformational shift.
At least two implications of these scenario analyses can be assessed. First, without a significant
governmental policy directed to R&D, it is not plausible to expect significant boosts of yields in the
future. Coupled with the limited possibilities for the expansion of agricultural land, to prevent the
collapse of the system under the dynamic growth of population and incomes, an increase in input
55
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
intensification will be necessary. Western Africa has one of the lowest shares of agricultural R&D
spending as a proportion of agricultural GDP in the world (0.5% vs 5% in high income countries).
In earlier research it was estimated that under a 0.5% share of R&D spending in agricultural GDP,
land productivity can grow up to 1% annually (Figure 18) [51]. In order to close the yield gap with
high income countries, yields would need to grow by 3.5% annually, which requires a much larger
share of R&D spending than is the current spending.
􀏬􀍘􀏬
􀏬􀍘􀏮
􀏬􀍘􀏰
􀏬􀍘􀏲
􀏬􀍘􀏴
􀏭􀍘􀏬
􀏭􀍘􀏮
􀏭􀍘􀏰
􀁅􀅝􀅐􀄞􀆌􀅝􀄂􀀃􀍾􀁞􀁞􀁗􀏮􀍿 􀁴􀄞􀆐􀆚􀀃􀀄􀄨􀆌􀅝􀄐􀄂􀀃􀁚􀎘􀀘
􀆐􀅚􀄂􀆌􀄞􀀃􀏬􀍘􀏱􀐹
􀁴􀄞􀆐􀆚􀀃􀀄􀄨􀆌􀅝􀄐􀄂􀀃􀁚􀎘􀀘
􀆐􀅚􀄂􀆌􀄞􀀃􀏭􀐹
􀁴􀄞􀆐􀆚􀀃􀀄􀄨􀆌􀅝􀄐􀄂􀀃􀁞􀅚􀄂􀆌􀄞
􀁚􀎘􀀘􀀃􀆐􀅚􀄂􀆌􀄞􀏭􀍘􀏱􀐹
Figure 18. Expected annual growth of land productivity (2011–2050) in the SSP2 scenario and under
alternative intensities for R&D. Sources: for Nigeria, the IMAGE model [47]; for West-Africa under
different R&D intensities, the MAGNET model [51].
The second implication is related to the nature of the land tenure system in Nigeria that has been
critiqued to be expensive, cumbersome, time-consuming, and risky, creating a major bottleneck for
improving the food supply system [42,45]. If rigidity on the land market is project to remain the status
quo, and under contextual changes towards 2050 (as presented by assumptions on buoyant economic
growth, population growth and urbanization and technology change), demand growth from the rising
middle classes are projected to take the form of more processed food and higher consumption of animal
source foods. The model suggests strong import competition in Nigeria for these sectors. Meat and
dairy would be produced only in part from domestic livestock systems and with limited backward
linkages into domestic cropping systems because of the scarcity and low productivity on crop land.
As a result, a significant portion of demand is projected to be sourced from imports. A speculative
interpretation of the scenario results for expansion in the meat and dairy sector with a higher input from
skilled labour and capital is that “footloose” livestock production systems may thrive in the vicinity of
urban centres. These are capital-intensive production systems, aimed at maximum technical efficiency,
yet with possible trade-offs in terms of benefits to ecological and human livelihood systems [52].
While these systems may provide clear benefits in terms of an effective and efficient food provision,
if these systems depend on global imports of feed or intermediate products (frozen meat, milk powder),
the general equilibrium effects on food security and diet quality at population level may be less
beneficial for society than under an alternative scenario that promotes a more diverse domestic supply.
With land substitution demand, pull may benefit the rural development and nutrition agenda for the
rural population. A striking result is that intensification in the analysis results in greater diversity of
the production systems, which in turn cascades into positive effects on the diversity in the food supply.
This suggests that intensification in Nigeria would lead to the availability of foods with higher density
in micronutrients than without intensification.
The results of our study can be put into context with other empirical evidence, although, as argued
in the introduction section, the macroeconomic perspective on the linkage between food systems
and diets is not yet sufficiently covered in the existing literature. One recent study applied a CGE
methodology as well, to carry out an economic assessment of climate change impacts in Nigeria [16].
Whereas the authors warn against possible growth of food prices and higher food dependency on
56
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
foreign imports due to climate change, they do not analyse the nutritional aspects of climate change
impacts in Nigeria. Another study examined the agricultural transformation and its relation to hunger
and poverty eradication in Nigeria [43]. The study argued that a rural transition is a condition for
the alleviation of hunger and poverty. First, a structural change in labour markets to commercialize
agriculture and develop agro-based industries was considered to be a major agricultural development
pathway in Nigeria. This is in line with our study that clearly shows that in the absence of land
substitution, labour currently employed in agriculture will have to seek employment outside of the
primary sector, accelerating the process of urbanization. However, it can also be argued that in case of
higher intensification, the agricultural labour could be used more productively within the agricultural
sector and contribute thus to growth of rural wages. Second, the potential importance of increased
capitalisation of the agricultural sector by improving access to credit was considered as a condition
for the commercialisation pathway to materialise [43]. The findings from this study corroborate this;
under assumptions that land is better substitutable for other inputs, the food-industry can absorb as
much as 40% more capital, which points out to the need to improve access to credit to stimulate the
intensification process of Nigerian agri-food system.
Various global initiatives employ food systems foresight on the global scale. A recent review
identified a paucity of studies that apply comparable methodologies at regional and national levels [8].
It is instructive, therefore, to reflect on this study on the food systems foresight on Nigeria from the
perspective of an earlier global approach that addressed similar themes using comparable methods
as ours [53]. The baseline scenario in this study identified similar challenges in achieving the goals
of achieving food and nutrition security in the absence of agricultural intensification. These are
upward pressure on land prices, high food prices threating economic growth, insufficient agricultural
productivity growth and a prevalence of micronutrient deficiency. In view of this, the results of
this study, while focussed on Nigeria, can provide lessons for other developing countries facing
similar issues of rapid transformation coupled with the triple burden of malnutrition. Results of
this study indicate that different trajectories of the food system affect average diet developments
towards more calories, carbohydrates and fats or alternatively towards an increased importance of
fruit and vegetables. While showing that food system developments matter for the undernutrition,
micronutrient deficiency and obesity challenges of fast changing countries like Nigeria, complementary
micro-level analyses are needed to assess the food system impacts on the nutrient transition of
vulnerable population groups.
There are several limitations of this study that should be mentioned. Because of the widespread
presence of informal arrangements in Nigerian markets, it is difficult to represent them in a broad-based
modelling framework such as the global computable equilibrium model used here. A further limitation
is that the behavioural decisions of consumers are modelled for a single representative household.
No distinction is made regarding the livelihood system or geography of the household, even though
these conditions will obviously drive both production and consumption decisions as well as dietary
outcomes. Analyses of household consumption point to large differences across households in
relation to socioeconomic, geographic and cultural variables [30,32,33]. In particular, the regional and
rural/urban dimensions of nutrition warrant a deeper analysis if it is made useful for policy-making
in Nigeria.
With respect to the areas of future research, a further analysis of the heterogeneity of household
response to food systems drivers is considered as key issue. As consumer diets should be seen as
outcomes as well as drivers of the performance of national food systems, maintaining a link with the
macro-level framework as presented here is considered to be important while exploring response at
the micro-level in greater depth. The question raised before, whether Nigeria’s national food system
has the potential to nourish its population with a healthy diet, can therefore be answered only in part,
with these limitations in mind.
57
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
5. Conclusions
This paper provides a perspective on the future of food systems in Nigeria, taking into account
an interplay of various macroeconomic and biophysical drivers. Because of its highly dynamic
economic growth and demographic boom, the country represents an interesting case of studying
the impact of these drivers on the food systems.
Given the historical increase in land expansion and low yield growth, land availability was
identified as the key constraining factor determining the future of the food systems and food security.
The projections obtained in this study distinguish two future worlds for Nigeria and it is the land
rigidity and extensification that determines which of the two worlds would become reality. In the first
world, where land would be used extensively without inputs substitution, increasing pressures on
the land market would result in excessive growth of producer prices. Food systems production value
would increase about six times to the benefit of some agri-food players, mainly (white) meat processing
sectors that could turn net exporters for the first time. For the economy as a whole, it would bring
a positive structural transformation towards industrialization, higher role of services, less agriculture
and less oil & gas. This is because industry and services would benefit from the release of non-land
resources from agriculture. On the other hand, the world would become less favourable for consumers
due to rising food prices, declining wages and increasing wage disparity between agriculture and the
rest of the economy. Most of the income of the consumers would be spent on food and the access to
food as one of the dimensions of food security would worsen not only for the unskilled but also for
the skilled labour endowed households. From the nutritional point of view, the households would
consume more calories, but these would come from more processed foods such as flour and palm oil,
as well as from white meat.
In the alternative world, the non-land inputs, particularly labour, would substitute increasingly
scarcer land. Higher land productivity due to the use of more inputs would rise wages in
agriculture resulting in a more pro-poor growth. The traditionally trade-oriented sectors would
restore competitiveness and, eventually, agri-food trade would enjoy a positive trade balance in many
commodities. The structural transformation from agriculture to industry would be also expected,
but with a higher share of food-economy. Because of decreasing food prices and increasing wages,
food security would improve and the share of food expenditures in total expenditures would be
comparable to a middle-income economy. Although the caloric consumption would come from more
from primary agriculture, the share of fruits and vegetables would be higher, with more positive
health impacts.
Main policy recommendations for fostering food systems development with positive nutritional
impacts in Nigeria are directed to increased investments in agricultural R&D to alleviate the land
pressure, reducing the rigidity of land markets to stimulate entrance and exit from the land market and
to support intensification by improved access to capital markets and by replacing land for agricultural
labour to stimulate agricultural wages.
As argued in the discussion, for multiple reasons the evolution of impact of these food systems
changes on diet and nutrient gaps warrants further analysis and interpretation in a combined
micro-level and macro-level framework. Concretely, the absorption capacity of skilled labour inside
agriculture should be further assessed. An important area of future research is the analysis of
heterogeneity of household response to food systems by linking the macro-level framework to
simulating behaviour of individual households. This can enable tracing how the macro-drivers of food
system effect individuals’ nutritional outcomes and provide more insights into the nutrition inequality.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Z.S.K. and T.A.; methodology, Z.S.K. and M.K.; investigation, Z.S.K.
and T.A.; data curation, Z.S.K. and M.K.; writing—original draft preparation, Z.S.K. and T.A; writing—review
and editing, Z.S.K., T.A. and M.K.; visualization, Z.S.K.; project administration and funding acquisition, T.A.
Funding: This research was funded by CGIAR program Agriculture for Nutrition and Health (A4NH), grant no.
P329 “Key leverage points in the food system”, Dutch Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality under
grant no. WUR-KB22-001-003, and the European Union under Grant Agreement no. 633692 (SUSFANS).
58
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
Acknowledgments: We thank Jonathan Doelman, PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency,
for sharing data on land use in Nigeria, and for his comments on the scenario design. We thank participants at
the A4NH technical stakeholder workshop on food systems diagnosis and foresight (Abuja, 2–3 July 2018),
SDG conference (Wageningen, 30 August 2018) and Tropentag (Ghent, September 2018) for comments
and discussions.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.
Appendix A The Nested Structure of CES and CET Functions in MAGNET
􀀯􀅶􀆚􀄞􀆌􀅵􀍾􀆚􀅽􀆉􀍺􀄐􀅽􀅵􀅵􀍿
􀍾􀏬􀍿
􀅶􀄞􀆐􀆚􀏭 􀅝􀅶􀆚􀄞􀆌􀅵􀄞􀄚􀅝􀄂􀆚􀄞􀆐
􀍾􀏬􀍘􀏭􀍿
􀅶􀄞􀆐􀆚􀀃􀏯
􀍾􀏬􀍘􀏳􀏱􀍿
􀅯􀄂􀅶􀄚 􀄨􀄞􀆌􀆚􀅝􀅯􀅝􀇌􀄞􀆌
􀅶􀄞􀆐􀆚􀏮
􀍾􀏬􀍘􀏮􀏲􀍿
􀅯􀄂􀄏􀅽􀆵􀆌
􀍾􀏱􀏬􀍿
􀁨􀅶􀆐􀅬􀅝􀅯􀅯􀄞􀄚􀀃
􀅯􀄂􀄏􀅽􀆵􀆌 􀁞􀅬􀅝􀅯􀅯􀄞􀄚􀀃􀅯􀄂􀄏􀅽􀆵􀆌
􀄐􀄂􀆉􀅝􀆚􀄂􀅯 􀅶􀄂􀆚􀀃􀆌􀄞􀆐
Figure A1. The nested production structure in the crop production sectors (substitution elasticity is in
the brackets).
􀀯􀅶􀆚􀄞􀆌􀅵􀀃
􀍾􀆚􀅽􀆉􀍺􀄐􀅽􀅵􀅵􀍿
􀍾􀏬􀍿
􀅝􀅶􀆚􀄞􀆌􀅵􀄞􀄚􀅝􀄂􀆚
􀄞􀆐
􀅶􀄞􀆐􀆚􀏭
􀍾􀏬􀍘􀏭􀍿
􀅶􀄞􀆐􀆚􀀃􀏯
􀍾􀏬􀍘􀏱􀍿
􀅯􀄂􀅶􀄚 􀅶􀄞􀆐􀆚􀀃􀏰
􀍾􀏯􀍿
􀀒􀅽􀅶􀄐􀄞􀅶􀆚􀆌􀄂􀆚􀄞􀀃
􀄨􀄞􀄞􀄚 􀀒􀆌􀅽􀆉􀀃􀄨􀄞􀄞􀄚
􀍾􀏬􀍘􀏭􀍿
􀅶􀄞􀆐􀆚􀀃􀏮
􀍾􀏬􀍘􀏮􀏲􀍿􀀃􀀃
􀄐􀄂􀆉􀅝􀆚􀄂􀅯 􀅯􀄂􀄏􀅽􀆵􀆌
􀍾􀏱􀏬􀍿
􀁞􀅬􀅝􀅯􀅯􀄞􀄚􀀃
􀀾􀄂􀄏􀅽􀆵􀆌
􀁨􀅶􀆐􀅬􀅝􀅯􀅯􀄞􀄚􀀃
􀅯􀄂􀄏􀅽􀆵􀆌
􀅶􀄂􀆚 􀆌􀄞􀆐
􀀧􀄂􀆐􀍕􀀃􀅽􀅝􀅯􀀃􀄂􀅶􀄚􀀃
􀄨􀅝􀆐􀅚
Figure A2. The nested production structure in the livestock production sectors (substitution elasticity
is in the brackets).
59
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
􀀯􀅶􀆚􀄞􀆌􀅵􀍾􀆚􀅽􀆉􀍺􀄐􀅽􀅵􀅵􀍿
􀍾􀏬􀍿
􀅝􀅶􀆚􀄞􀆌􀅵􀄞􀄚􀅝􀄂􀆚􀄞
􀅶􀄞􀆐􀆚􀏭
􀍾􀏭􀍘􀏯􀏱􀍿
􀅯􀄂􀅶􀄚 􀆐􀅬􀅝􀅯􀅯􀄞􀄚􀀃􀅯􀄂􀄏􀅽􀆵􀆌
􀆵􀅶􀆐􀅬􀅝􀅯􀅯􀄞􀄚
􀅯􀄂􀄏􀅽􀆵􀆌 􀄐􀄂􀆉􀅝􀆚􀄂􀅯 􀅶􀄂􀆚􀆌􀄞􀆐
Figure A3. The nested production structure in the food processing industry, other industry and services
production sectors (substitution elasticity is in the brackets).
􀀄􀀧􀁚􀀯􀀃􀀾􀀄􀁅􀀘
􀍾􀍲􀏬􀍘􀏮􀍿
􀅚􀅽􀆌􀆚 􀁅􀀜􀁞􀁤􀏮
􀍾􀍲􀏬􀍘􀏰􀍿
􀆉􀄚􀆌 􀁅􀀜􀁞􀁤􀏯
􀍾􀍲􀏬􀍘􀏲􀍿
􀇁􀅚􀆚 􀅐􀆌􀄂􀅝􀅶 􀅽􀅝􀅯􀆐
􀀒􀄂􀆚􀆚􀅯􀄞􀀃􀄂􀅶􀄚􀀃
􀅽􀆚􀅚􀄞􀆌􀀃􀅯􀅝􀇀􀄞􀆐􀆚􀅽􀄐􀅬 􀇁􀅽􀅯 􀅵􀅝􀅯􀅬
􀄐􀆌􀅽􀆉􀆐 􀅽􀄂􀅐􀆌 􀆉􀅯􀄂􀅶
Figure A4. The structure of land allocation in the CET function (substitution elasticity is in the brackets).
Appendix B MAGNET and GENUS Database
Table A1. List of MAGNET sectors and mapping to GTAP.
GTAP Code Description MAGNET Code Description
pdr Paddy rice pdr Paddy and processed rice
wht Wheat wht Wheat
gro Cereal grains nec grain Cereal grains nec
osd Oil seeds oils Oil seeds
c_b Sugar cane, sugar beet sug Sugar cane, sugar beet
v_f Vegetables, fruit, nuts hort Vegetables, fruit, nuts
ocr Crops nec crops Crops nec
pfb Plant-based fibers oagr Other agriculture
Bfctl * beef cattle cattle sector
ctl Cattle, sheep, goats, horses othctl sheep, goats, horses
Pltry * poultry live animals pltry poultry sector
wol Wool, silk-worm cocoons wol Wool, silk-worm cocoons
oap Animal products nec pigpls Pig and other animal product
rmk Raw milk milk Raw milk
BFCMT * beaf meat bfmt beef meat
cmt Meat: cattle, sheep, goats, horse othcmt Meat: other cattle, sheep, goats, horse
Poum * Poultry meat pulmt poultry meat
omt Meat products nec othmt Other meat product nec
mil Dairy products dairy Dairy products
60
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
Table A1. Cont.
GTAP Code Description MAGNET Code Description
sgr Sugar and molase sugar Sugar and molasses
vol Vegetable oils and fats vol Vegetable oils and fats
pcr Processed rice pcr Processed rice
ofd and b_t Food products nec, Beverages and tobacco ofd Processed food
Feed * Animal feed feed Animal feed
Fsh * Fishing wfish Wild fish
Aqcltr * Diadromis fish aqcltr Aquaculture
Fishp * Fish processing fishp Fish processing
Fishm * Fish meal fishm fish meal
Note: GTAP codes with * refer to sectors that are newly disaggregated in MAGNET. Original GTAP sectors are
found at: https://www.gtap.agecon.purdue.edu/databases/v9/v9_sectors.asp.
Table A2. GENUS macro and micronutrient data for Nigeria (2011).
1 Median 2 Low 3 High
1 EdFd 1549 1549 1549
2 Calorie 2969 2911 3052
3 Protein 66 62 71
4 Fat 58 56 65
5 Carb 58 56 65
6 VitC 218 203 274
7 VitA 1118 151 1299
8 Folate 473 463 516
9 Calcium 423 365 508
10 Iron 23 19 26
11 Zinc 13 12 15
12 Potas 5379 5100 5613
13 Fiber 49 47 55
14 Copper 3 2 3
15 Sodium 195 183 210
16 Phosph 1452 1366 1768
17 Thiamin 2 2 3
18 Ribofl 1 1 1
19 Niacin 16 14 27
20 B6 3 3 3
21 Magnsm 623 594 803
22 SatFat 22 21 25
23 MonoUSF 20 18 22
24 PolyUSF 14 12 15
Appendix C Detailed MAGNET Results
Table A3. Annual growth of factor prices (2020–50) and % difference of prices in 2050 (Land_Subs vs
Land_Fixed scenario).
Factor Sector Land_Fixed Land_Subs % Diff. 2050
Land AGRI_PRIM 12.8 0.2 −98
UnSkLab
AGRI_PRIM −1.5 0.0 62
OTHER_SECTORS 0.5 2.0 55
SkLab
AGRI_PRIM −1.5 0.0 60
OTHER_SECTORS −1.4 0.0 58
Capital AGRI_PRIM −2.3 −1.3 37
OTHER_SECTORS −2.2 −1.2 37
61
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
􀏰􀏭􀐹
􀏮􀏯􀐹 􀏮􀏴􀐹
􀏮􀏰􀐹
􀏭􀏳􀐹
􀏭􀏵􀐹
􀏭􀏭􀐹
􀏭􀏵􀐹 􀏭􀏰􀐹
􀏮􀏱􀐹
􀏰􀏭􀐹 􀏯􀏵􀐹
􀏮 􀏬 􀏭 􀏭 􀀾 􀀄 􀁅 􀀘 􀍺 􀀦 􀀯 􀁹 􀀜 􀀘 􀀾 􀀄 􀁅 􀀘 􀍺 􀁞 􀁨 􀀑 􀁞
􀀦􀁋􀁋􀀘􀍺􀁞􀁺􀁞 􀁋􀀯􀀾􀎘􀀧􀀄􀁞 􀀯􀁅􀀘􀁨􀁞􀁤􀁚􀁺 􀁞􀀜􀁚􀁳􀎘􀁨􀁤􀀯􀀾
Figure A5. The structure of real value added.
Table A4. Absolute difference of sector endowment volumes in Land_subs vs. Land_Fixed scenario in
2050 (million USD in constant prices of 2011).
UnSkLab SkLab Capital
AGRI_PRIM 2659 16,281 9151
hort 912 7307 4387
crops 6741 2806 4094
pdr 2172 1809 1821
grain −3514 1799 −333
oils −553 1435 585
othctl −924 484 −82
wht 1046 343 583
oagr 448 234 298
cattle −804 215 −185
sug −199 64 −40
pigpls −936 −80 −696
pltry −1747 −142 −1291
AGRI_proc 57 134 5087
ofd 157 3003 2499
othcmt 35 409 1695
sugar 12 206 54
pcr 8 149 405
vol 2 38 35
bfmt −13 −673 1708
pulmt −53 −1096 −492
othmt −98 −2034 −940
FISH SECTORS −3472 −89 −3373
wfish −3462 −24 −3360
aqcltr −3 0 −4
fishp −7 −65 −9
AGRI_FOOD −760 16,325 10,863
INDUSTRY −609 −20,568 −24,790
SERV&UTIL 4791 4765 5587
62
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
􀏰􀍘􀏱
􀏬􀍘􀏳
􀍲􀏭􀍘􀏵 􀍲􀏭􀍘􀏳 􀍲􀏭􀍘􀏴
􀏬􀍘􀏳
􀍲􀏬􀍘􀏳
􀍲􀏭􀍘􀏯
􀍲􀏯􀍘􀏬
􀍲􀏮􀍘􀏬
􀍲􀏭􀍘􀏬
􀏬􀍘􀏬
􀏭􀍘􀏬
􀏮􀍘􀏬
􀏯􀍘􀏬
􀏰􀍘􀏬
􀏱􀍘􀏬
􀀄􀀧􀁚􀀯􀍺􀀦􀁋􀁋􀀘 􀁋􀀯􀀾􀎘􀀧􀀄􀁞 􀁞􀀜􀁚􀁳􀎘􀁨􀁤􀀯􀀾 􀀯􀁅􀀘􀁨􀁞􀁤􀁚􀁺
􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚 􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐
Figure A6. Annual growth of producer prices in Nigerian economy between 2020–2050.
􀏯􀏬􀐹
􀏰􀏬􀐹
􀏱􀏬􀐹
􀏲􀏬􀐹
􀏳􀏬􀐹
􀏴􀏬􀐹
􀏵􀏬􀐹
􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏭 􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏱 􀏮􀏬􀏮􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏯􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏰􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏱􀏬
􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀀦􀅝􀇆􀄞􀄚 􀀾􀄂􀅶􀄚􀍺􀁞􀆵􀄏􀆐
Figure A7. Share of food expenditures in total household expenditures.
References
1. World Bank. World Development Indicators; World Bank: Washington, DC, USA, 2018.
2. Mandryk, M.; Doelman, J.; Stehfest, E. Assessment of Global Land Availability: Land Supply for Agriculture.
FOODSECURE Technical Papers; LEI Wageningen UR. 2015. Available online: https://www.pbl.nl/en/
publicaties/assessment-of-global-land-availability-land-supply-for-agriculture (accessed on 5 September 2018).
3. National Population Commission Nigeria. I. C. F. International Nigeria Demographic and Health Survey, 2013;
National Population Commission Nigeria: Abuja, Nigeria, 2014.
4. Imamura, F.; Micha, R.; Khatibzadeh, S.; Fahimi, S.; Shi, P.; Powles, J.; Mozaffarian, D. Dietary quality among
men and women in 187 countries in 1990 and 2010: A systematic assessment. Lancet Glob. Health 2015, 3,
e132–e142. [CrossRef]
5. HLPE. Nutrition and Food Systems; The High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the
Committee onWorld Food Security: Rome, Italy, 2017.
6. HLPE. Food Losses and Waste in the Context of Sustainable Food Systems; The High Level Panel of Experts on
Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee onWorld Food Security: Rome, Italy, 2014.
7. Ingram, J. A food systems approach to researching food security and its interactions with global
environmental change. Food Secur. 2011, 3, 417–431. [CrossRef]
8. Van Dijk, M.; Meijerink, G. A Review of Global Food Security Scenario and Assessment Studies: Results, Gaps and
Research Priorities; FOODSECUREWorking Papers; LEI:Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2014.
9. Zurek, M.; Hebinck, A.; Leip, A.; Vervoort, J.; Kuiper, M.; Garrone, M.; Havlík, P.; Heckelei, T.; Hornborg, S.;
Ingram, J.; et al. Assessing Sustainable Food and Nutrition Security of the EU Food System—An Integrated
Approach. Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271. [CrossRef]
63
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
10. De Haen, H.; Réquillart, V. Linkages between sustainable consumption and sustainable production:
Some suggestions for foresight work. Food Secur. 2014, 6, 87–100. [CrossRef]
11. Abdullahi, D.; John, M.S. The Political will and Quality Basic Education in Nigeria. J. Power Polit. Gov. 2014, 2.
12. WENR. Education in Nigeria; World Education News & Reviews: New York, NY, USA, 2017.
13. UNDESA. World Urbanization Prospects—2018 Revision; United Nations Population Division: Geneva,
Switzerland, 2018.
14. CTA. A Case Study Report on Nigeria’s Agricultural Extension and Advisory System; Technical Center for
Agricultural and Rural Cooperation: Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2011.
15. DLEC Project. Nigeria: In-Depth Assessment of Extension and Advisory Services; Developing Local Extension
Capacity Project; Care, Digital Green, IFPRI and USAID; United States Agency for International Development:
Washington, DC, USA, 2017.
16. Bosello, F.; Campagnolo, L.; Cervigni, R.; Eboli, F. Climate Change and Adaptation: The Case of Nigerian
Agriculture. Environ. Resour. Econ. 2018, 69, 787–810. [CrossRef]
17. Ayuba, I.G.U.; Ayuba, L.I. The Effect of Internal Displacement and Variation in Crop Production in Barkin
Ladi Local Government Area of Plateau State. J. Environ. Earth Sci. 2016, 6, 35–40.
18. Tari, V.A.; Kibikiwa, M.G.; Umar, K. The effects of Boko Haram insurgency on food security status of some
selected local government areas in Adamawa State, Nigeria. Sky J. Food Sci. 2016, 5, 12–18.
19. Van Berkum, S.; Achterbosch, T.; Linderhof, V.; Godeschalk, F.; Vroege, W. Dynamics of Food Systems
in Sub-Saharan Africa: Implications for Consumption Patterns and Farmers’ Position in Food Supply Chains;
Wageningen Economic Research: The Hague, The Netherlands, 2017.
20. Okeke, E.C.; Eneobong, H.N.; Uzuegbunam, A.O.; Ozioko, A.O.; Kuhnlein, H. Igbo Traditional Food System:
Documentation, Uses and Research Needs. Pak. J. Nutr. 2008, 7, 365–376. [CrossRef]
21. Kuiper, M.; Kalter, J.; Mertens, E.; Latka, C.; Heckelei, T.; Leip, A.; Kanellopoulos, A.; Havlik, P.;
Achterbosch, T. The SUSFANS Toolbox for Assessing EU Sustainable Food and Nutrition Security; SUSFANS:
The Hague, The Netherlands, 2018.
22. Van Meijl, H.; Tsiropoulos, I.; Bartelings, H.; Hoefnagels, R.; Smeets, E.; Tabeau, A.; Faaij, A. On the
macro-economic impact of bioenergy and biochemicals—Introducing advanced bioeconomy sectors into an
economic modelling framework with a case study for the Netherlands. Biomass Bioenergy 2018, 108, 381–397.
[CrossRef]
23. Kuiper, M.; Shutes, L.; Verma, M.; Tabeau, A.; van Meijl, H. Exploring the Impact of Alternative Population
Projections on Prices, Growth and Poverty Developments; Background Paper to the UNCTAD-FAO Commodities
and Development Report 2017 Commodity Markets, Economic Growth and Development; FAO: Rome, Italy,
2018; ISBN 978-92-5-130096-1.
24. Helming, J.; Tabeau, A. The economic, environmental and agricultural land use effects in the European
Union of agricultural labour subsidies under the Common Agricultural Policy. Reg. Environ. Chang. 2018, 18,
763–773. [CrossRef]
25. Woltjer, G.; Kuiper, M.; Kavallari, A.; van Meijl, H.; Powell, J.; Rutten, M.; Shutes, L.; Tabeau, A. The MAGNET
Model: Module Description; LEIWageningen UR: The Hague, The Netherlands, 2012.
26. Aguiar, A.; Narayanan, B.; McDougall, R. An Overview of the GTAP 9 Data Base. J. Glob. Econ. Anal. 2016, 1,
181–208. [CrossRef]
27. Keeney, R.; Hertel, T. GTAP-AGR: A Framework for Assessing the Implications of Multilateral Changes in
Agricultural Policies; GTAP Technical Paper No. 24; Purdue University: Purdue, IN, USA, 2005.
28. Tabeau, A.; Helming, J.; Philippidis, G. Land Supply Elasticity: Overview of Available Estimates and Recommended
Values for Magnet; EU: Brussels, Belgium, 2017; ISBN 978-92-79-69102-7.
29. Smith, M.R.; Micha, R.; Golden, C.D.; Mozaffarian, D.; Myers, S.S. Global Expanded Nutrient Supply
(GENuS) Model: A New Method for Estimating the Global Dietary Supply of Nutrients. PLoS ONE 2016, 11,
e0146976. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30. Brouwer, I.D.; Nijhuis, A.; Talsma, E.F.; Trijsburg, L.; Pastoria, G.; Mekonnen, D.A.; Morley, T.; Linderhof, V.;
Achterbosch, T. The state of the dietary and nutrient gaps in Nigeria. In Proceedings of the A4NH Stakeholder
Workshop “Food Systems for Healthier Diets in Nigeria”; IFPRI:Washington, DC, USA, 2018.
31. NBS. Nigeria—General Household Survey, Panel 2015–2016, Wave 3; NBS: Abuja, Nigeria, 2017.
32. Akerele, D. Household Food Expenditure Patterns, Food Nutrient Consumption and Nutritional
Vulnerability in Nigeria: Implications for Policy. Ecol. Food Nutr. 2015, 54, 546–571. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64
Sustainability 2019, 11, 835
33. Aromolaran, A.B. Does increase in women’s income relative to men’s income increase food calorie intake in
poor households? Evidence from Nigeria. Agric. Econ. 2010, 41, 239–249. [CrossRef]
34. Onyemauwa, C.S. Analysis of Household Consumption of Cassava Products in Ohaozara, Ebonyi State,
Southeast Nigeria. Researcher 2010, 2, 1–6.
35. Arndt, C. Nigeria’s Macroeconomic Crisis Explained; NSSP Working Paper; International Food Policy Research
Institute (IFPRI): Abuja, Nigeria, 2018.
36. World Bank. Macro Poverty Outlook for Sub-Saharan Africa: Nigeria; World Bank: Washington, DC, USA, 2018;
pp. 266–267.
37. International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook Database April 2018. Available online: https:
//www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2018/01/weodata/index.aspx (accessed on 15 November 2018).
38. Riahi, K.; van Vuuren, D.P.; Kriegler, E.; Edmonds, J.; O’Neill, B.C.; Fujimori, S.; Bauer, N.; Calvin, K.;
Dellink, R.; Fricko, O.; et al. The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and their energy, land use, and greenhouse
gas emissions implications: An overview. Glob. Environ. Chang. 2017, 42, 153–168. [CrossRef]
39. Fricko, O.; Havlik, P.; Rogelj, J.; Klimont, Z.; Gusti, M.; Johnson, N.; Kolp, P.; Strubegger, M.; Valin, H.;
Amann, M.; et al. The marker quantification of the Shared Socioeconomic Pathway 2: A middle-of-the-road
scenario for the 21st century. Glob. Environ. Chang. 2017, 42, 251–267. [CrossRef]
40. PWC. The World in 2050; Pricewaterhouse Coopers: London, UK, 2017.
41. Lutz, Butz, and Kc Wittgenstein Centre Data Explorer. Available online: http://dataexplorer.
wittgensteincentre.org/shiny/wic/ (accessed on 15 November 2018).
42. PWC. Transforming Nigeria’s Agricultural Value Chain; PricewaterhouseCoopers: London, UK, 2017.
43. Nwankpa, N. Sustainable Agricultural Development in Nigeria: AWay Out of Hunger and Poverty. Eur. J.
Sustain. Dev. 2017, 6, 175–184. [CrossRef]
44. Laborde, D.; Lallemant, T.; McDougal, K.; Smaller, C.; Fousseini, T. Transforming Agriculture in Africa & Asia:
What Are the Policy Priorities? ISSD and IFPRI: Washington, DC, USA, 2018.
45. UNDP. The Roles and Opportunities for the Private Sector in Africa’s Agro-Food Industry; United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP): Johannesburg, South Africa, 2012.
46. FAONigeria at a Glance. Available online: http://www.fao.org/nigeria/fao-in-nigeria/nigeria-at-a-glance/en/
(accessed on 15 November 2018).
47. Stehfest, E.; van Vuuren, D.; Bouwman, L.; Kram, T. Integrated Assessment of Global Environmental Change with
IMAGE 3.0: Model Description and Policy Applications; Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (PBL):
Bilthoven, The Netherlands, 2014; ISBN 94-91506-71-4.
48. World Bank. World Development Indicators—Fertilizer Consumption; World Bank: Washington, DC, USA, 2018.
49. World Bank. World Development Report 2008: Agriculture for Development; The World Bank: Washington, DC,
USA, 2008.
50. Liverpool-Tasie, L.S.; Barrett, C.B.; Sheahan, M.B. Understanding Fertilizer Use and Profitability of Rice
Production across Nigeria’s Diverse Agroecological Conditions. In Proceedings of the Annual Bank
Conference on Africa 2014. Available online: http://catalog.ihsn.org/index.php/citations/61607 (accessed
on 5 September 2018).
51. Kristkova, Z.S.; van Dijk, M.; van Meijl, H. Assessing the Impact of Agricultural R&D Investments on
Long-Term Projections of Food Security. In World Agricultural Resources and Food Security; Frontiers of
Economics and Globalization; Emerald Publishing Limited: Bingley, UK, 2017; Volume 17, pp. 1–17.
52. Baltussen, W.; Achterbosch, T.; Arets, E.; de Blaeij, A.; Erlenborn, N.; Fobelets, V.; Galgani, P.; de Groot
Ruiz, A.; Hardwicke, R.; Hiemstra, S.J.; et al. Valuation of Livestock Eco-Agri-Food Systems: Poultry, Beef and
Dairy; Wageningen Economic Research Report; 2017-039; Wageningen Economic Research: Wageningen,
The Netherlands, 2017; ISBN 978-90-8615-734-1.
53. Dobermann, A.; Nelson, R.; Beever, D.; Bergvinson, D.; Crowley, E.; Denning, G.; Giller, K.; d’Arros Hughes, J.;
Jahn, M.; Lynam, J. Solutions for Sustainable Agriculture and Food Systems. U. N. Sustain. Dev. Solut.
Netw. Paris Fr. 2013. Available online: http://unsdsn.org/what-we-do/thematic-networks/sustainableagriculture-
and-food-systems/ (accessed on 5 September 2018).
© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
65
sustainability
Article
Social Capital and Adoption of Alternative
Conservation Agricultural Practices in
South-Western Nigeria
Seyi Olalekan Olawuyi * and Abbyssinia Mushunje
Department of Agricultural Economics and Extension, University of Fort Hare, P/Bag X1314, Alice 5700,
Eastern Cape Province, South Africa; amushunje@ufh.ac.za
* Correspondence: seyidolapo1704@gmail.com
Received: 29 September 2018; Accepted: 26 November 2018; Published: 30 January 2019
	

Abstract: The major concern of most African countries, including Nigeria, in recent times is how to
increase food production because of food insecurity issues, which by extension, is a major contributing
factor to the prevalence of poverty. Therefore, adoption of conservation agricultural practices is
regarded as a pathway to drive the achievement of food and nutrition security, as well as the needed
optimal performance in the agri-food sector. Reportedly, scaling up of the limited adoption of these
practices could be facilitated through kinship ties, peer influence, and social networks that govern
mutual interactions among individuals; therefore, this motivated the study. Using cross-sectional data
obtained from 350 sample units selected from South-Western Nigeria through a multistage sampling
technique, this study applied descriptive statistical tools and cross-tabulation techniques to profile
the sampled subjects while count outcome models were used to investigate the factors driving counts
of conservative agriculture (CA) adoption. Similarly, a marginal treatment effects (MTEs) model
(parametric approach) using local IV estimator was applied to examine the effects of CA adoption on
the outcome (log of farmers’ farm income). Additionally, appropriate measures of fit tests statistics
were used to test the reliabilities of the fitted models. Findings revealed that farmers’ years of farming
experience (p < 0.1), frequency of extension visits (p < 0.05), and social capital viz-a-viz density of
social group memberships (p < 0.05) significantly determined the count of CA practices adopted with
varying degrees by smallholder farmers. Although, social capital expressed in terms of membership
of occupational group and diversity of social group members also had a positive influence on the
count of CA practices adopted but not significant owing largely to the “information gaps” about
agricultural technologies in the study area. However, the statistical tests of the MTEs indicated that
the treatment effects differed significantly across the covariates and it also varied significantly with
unobserved heterogeneity. The policy relevant treatment effect estimates also revealed that different
policy scenarios could increase or decrease CA adoption, depending on which individuals it induces
to attract the expected spread and exposure.
Keywords: adoption; conservation agriculture; social capital; count outcome models; pca; marginal
treatment effects; Nigeria
1. Background Information
Sustainable economic growth and development in a developing economy like Nigeria is
achievable through the agricultural sector and its sub-sectors which are concentrated in rural areas,
home to the majority (about 75%) of the households practicing farming for family sustenance and/or
earning income fromthe sales of agricultural products [1]. In addition to the persistent use of traditional
farming practices, these rural farming households cultivate crop varieties that are low-yielding on small
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716; doi:10.3390/su11030716 66 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
and scattered farmland holdings (smallholder farmers). This act depletes the soil organic matter with
devastating consequences on production output, income generation as well as the ecosystem. Similarly,
non-access to agricultural credit and limited technical know-how are part of the challenges facing the
development of farming activities in sub-Saharan Africa, including Nigeria [2]. These challenges call
for holistic interventions that are sustainable, promote a safe environment, and ultimately increase
production output. Thus, a practice with zero environmental and human hazards which have
literatures converging [3–11] on its capability to use renewable local farm resources for sustainable
and increased production output is called conservative agriculture (CA).
Generally, CA is regarded as a resource saving agricultural practice that can help farmers
simultaneously harvest high yield and conserve the environment [12]. Besides, the water retention
characteristic of CA makes it suitable in water deficient farming areas. The basic CA principles include
the following practices: minimum soil disturbance, the use of crop biomass for permanent soil cover,
and sequential rotation practice for different unrelated crops; all these can potentially strengthen
farmers’ resilience to climate change and enhance the sustainability of agro-ecosystems [13–16].
The diagrammatic view of these three CA packages required for full adoption, according to these
authors is shown in Figure 1.
􀀃
Figure 1. Basic principles of conservative agriculture (CA) practices. Source: Calegari and
Ashburner [13] as cited in Ndah, Schuler, Uthes, and Zander [17].
Equally, the major concern of most African countries (including Nigeria) in recent times is how
to increase food production [18]. Meanwhile, rural food insecurity is a major contributing factor
to widespread poverty in Africa, and Nigeria is no exception, where most farmers are peasants.
Therefore, CA is regarded as a panacea to achieving food security and the needed optimal performance
in agricultural production, as it is now being promoted, without any negative consequences on the
environment. However, the tendency of CA in preserving the environment (erosion inclusive) and
improving soil properties cannot be under estimated [19]. This is because its success is reportedly
premised on the production environment and readiness of smallholder farmers to accept, adopt,
and continue to use this innovative method for sustainable management agricultural systems.
The potential of these practices to mitigate adverse effects of climate change and extreme weather
events was also emphasized by De Lucas et al. [20] and Deligios et al. [21]. Expectedly, farmers’
decisions to accept CA innovation according to Silici [4] could be facilitated through social capital
(SC); that is ties, kinship, peer influence, and social groups (formal or/and informal) vis-a-viz social
networks that govern the interactions among social group members. Hence, the motivations to factor
in the social aspect of farmers’ economic behavior in a bid to thoroughly understand the process of
CA uptake and adoption. The main focus point of agricultural research and scientific debates from
different fora for several decades and up till now is centered on agricultural sustainability and how to
67
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
gain proper understanding about the push and pull factors driving producers’ decision on agricultural
technology adoption [10,20]. Several past studies on adoption of new agricultural innovation
majorly pointed to human and physical capital among other factors as predictive determinants of
technology adoption [22–29], using a standard utility model at the individual adopter’s level. Similarly,
Pino et al. [30] citing Kirton [31] and Rogers [32] emphasized farmers’ innovativeness—an individual’s
characteristics as a driver of technologies adoption in a study conducted in Italy. The majority of these
studies tend to ignore that individual decisions are not just made, rather such are entrenched in a more
complex and organized system of communities whose individual decisions are products of shared
common interests, collective participation, and concerns based on mutual trust [4,9,33]. Collectively,
all these attributes are put together as “social capital”.
According to Lollo [34], the first mention of social capital concept was in 1916 by Lyda Judson
Hanifan in his seminar paper titled “The Rural School Community Center” published in the United
States. The paper discussed community involvement and how neighbors could possibly work together
to foster the performance and success of the schools. Suffice it to say that Hanifan [35] invoked the
idea of social capital by referring to it as:
“those tangible assets or substances that count for most in the daily lives of people, namely:
goodwill, fellowship, mutual sympathy, and social intercourse among the individuals and
families who make up a social unit. This further suggests that individual is helpless socially,
if left to himself. But, if he interacts with his neighbour, with chain of interconnectivity, there
will be an accumulation of social capital, which may immediately satisfy his social needs
and bear a social potentiality sufficient enough for the improvement in living conditions of
individuals. The community as a whole in turn will benefit by this cooperation (collective
participation), while individual will eventually find in his associations the advantages of the
help, the sympathy, and the fellowship of his neighbours.” ([35], p.130)
In lieu of this position, the concept of social capital vis-a-viz a social network framework has been
advocated for as a crucial factor to understand the interconnectivity existing between people, and
foster the aims and objectives of community development experts and stakeholders towards achieving
equitable and sustainable agricultural growth and development [36]. Therefore, social capital can
succinctly be conceptualized as features (i.e., reciprocity, norms, and trust) existing between people of
the same or diverse cultural background which facilitates cooperation among individuals for their
mutual and societal benefits [37–39].
Importantly, these features encourage collective action/participation towards achieving bonding
social networks and the much needed sustainable development [40]. Collective action/participation is
recognized as a crucial component of rural and economic development as well as local-level institutions
management [41] through which efficient flow of important information can be achieved among the
resource-poor farmers [42]. In a similar manner, Woolcock [40] and Aker [43] also affirmed that,
social capital can be facilitated through participation in formal and informal networks, registered social
organizations or community-based organizations as well as social movements. Hence, investment in
collective action/participation activities based on social capital-trust, with the expectation of reciprocity
and through mutual cooperation and co-existence, sharing of useful information among members
can definitely be helpful in pushing for uptake and adoption of improved agricultural technologies
towards achieving increased production output, better income and welfare, as well as the attainment
of Sustainable Development Goal two (SDG 2) [44].
Consequent on the above arguments, this study investigated the pathways through which social
networks can possibly drive adoption and adoption-count of alternative CA practices as well as the
possible effects and impacts of CA adoption on farmers’ farm income in South-Western Nigeria.
68
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. The Study Area
This research work was carried out in South-Western Nigeria which consists of six states, namely:
Ekiti, Lagos, Ogun, Ondo, Osun, and Oyo states. But, for the purpose of this research work, Oyo,
Osun, and Ondo states were used. The choice of these states was premised on the fact that adoption
of improved agricultural technologies (such as improved maize seeds, improved rice varieties and
cassava vitamin A fortified cassava varieties) had earlier been reported in these states of South-Western
Nigeria [45–48]. Moreover, the majority of the rural households in these states are into farming and
farming related activities. Importantly, the overview of the study area is presented in Figure 2.
􀀃
Figure 2. Map of South-Western Nigeria showing the states and Local Government Areas (LGAs) of
interest. Source: National Space Research and Development Agency of Nigeria (NASRDA) [49].
2.2. Sampling Technique and Data Collection
Multistage sampling technique was used to select the representative sample of 350 smallholder
farmers and responses were elicited with the aid of a carefully prepared questionnaire which is in line
with the guidelines provided in “Qualitative expert Assessment Tools for assessing the adoption of CA
in Africa (QAToCA)” taking into consideration the “regional factor” caution [50]. Hence, smallholder
farmers represent the entity under study (that is, the unit of analysis).
South-Western Nigerian states are stratified into agro-ecological zones which have been
pre-determined by the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development in each of
the states. Therefore, Oyo, Osun, and Ondo states are stratified into four, three, and two Agricultural
Development Programme (ADP) zones, respectively, based on rurality. First, a simple random sampling
technique was used to select 50% of the ADP zones in each of the three states to arrive at 2 ADPs from
Oyo State, 2 ADPs from Osun State, and 1 ADP from Ondo State, respectively. Equally, the second stage
made use of simple random sampling technique to select one-third (1/3) of the Local Government
Areas (LGAs) from each of the ADPs selected in the chosen states. The third stage also involved simple
random sampling to choose three villages from each of the LGAs selected in the second stage while
69
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
the fourth stage involved the use of a proportionate to size sampling technique to select 350 registered
smallholder farmers used as sample size for this study.
The proportionality factor applied for a bias-free sample size selection was:
Ni = ni/N × 350 (1)
where:
Ni = number of respondents/instruments selected in each of the ith state (i = 1, 2, and 3);
ni = the population of all registered farmers in ith states selected;
N = total population of all registered farmers in all the three states selected;
350 = total number of respondents sampled across the selected states.
Importantly, this research observed the following ethical considerations in the study area:
anonymity, informed consent, privacy, confidentiality, as well as professionalism.
2.3. Data Analytical Techniques
The analytical tools used include: descriptive statistics such as frequency counts, percentages, and
mean and standard deviation. Similarly, inferential statistics applied include: binary probit regression
model, count outcome models (Poisson and Negative Binomial regression models), marginal treatment
effects model, as well as principal components analysis (PCA) to generate index of social capital
benefits. More so, measures of fit statistics tests were applied to ascertain and affirm the reliabilities
of the fitted models. However, cautions were taken in the estimated models to avoid what is known
as “forbidden regression” ([51], pp. 265–268). This is a situation where the models’ results produce
consistent estimates only under very restrictive assumptions which rarely hold in practice.
2.3.1. Model Specification
Binary Probit Regression Model
Binary probit regression is usually applied to model dichotomous outcome variable [52].
According to Sebopetji and Belete [53], the probit model assumes that while 0 and 1 values are
only observed for the response variable Y, there is a latent and unobserved continuous variable Y* that
determines the value of the response variable Y. Therefore, Y* can be expressed as:
Y* = X1β + εi (2)
such that:
Y = 1 (Y* > 0). That is, Y = 1 if Y* > 0 i.e., (ε < X1β), 0, otherwise.
where:
Y = vector of the response variable (CA adoption = 1, 0, otherwise);
X = vector of explanatory variables, β = probit coefficients, εi = random error term.
Count Models
In estimating the Poisson model, according to Williams [54], let y be a random variable
representing the number of occurrences of an event during an interval of time; such that: y has
a Poisson distribution with parameter μ > 0 iff:
Pr(y|μ) = exp(−μ)μμy
y!
f or y = 0,1,2,3, . . . . . . . . . . . . n (3)
70
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
Equally, borrowing from Bruin [55], the negative binomial distribution model is expressed as:
Pr(Y = y|λ, α) =
Γ(y + α
−1)
y!Γ(α−1)

α
−1
α−1 + λ
α
−1
λ
α−1 + λ

y
(4)
Here, the negative binomial distribution has two parameters namely: λ and α, where:
λ = the mean or expected value of the distribution; and α = the over dispersion parameter.
However, the likelihood function for the negative binomial model according to Bruin [54] is
given by:
L(β|y,X) =
NΠ
i=1
Pr(yi|xi) =
NΠ
i=1
Γ(y + α
−1)
y!Γ(α−1)

α
−1
α−1 + μi
α
−1
μi
α−1 + μi

yi
(5)
Therefore, the relationship between the count of CA practices adopted by farmers and the specified
covariates is expressed as:
Yi = ƒ (FC, HC, IS, SC, Expt) (6)
where:
Yi = count of alternative CA practices adopted by ith farmer; FC = farmers and farm-based
attributes; HC = human capital; IS = institutional supports; SC = social capital and networks
components; Expt = exposure time period.
The explanatory variables are explicitly defined as follow:
X1 = gender (male = 1, 0, otherwise); X2 = age (years); X3 = years of formal education (years);
X4 = land acquisition (inheritance = 1, 0, otherwise); X5 = CA farm size (plot/ha-continuous);
X6 = total years of experience in farming (years); X7 = frequency of extension visits (actual
number-continuous); X8 = occupational group membership (yes = 1, 0, otherwise);
X9 = participation in collective action/initiatives (yes = 1, 0, otherwise); X10 = density of
social groups membership (actual number-continuous); X11 = diversity of social group members
(heterogeneity index) (%); X12 = participation in decision making (decision making index) (%);
* years of experience in CA practices (a proxy for exposure period) (years).
Marginal Treatment Effects Model
The marginal treatment effects model (MTE) using local IV is usually applied to capture
heterogeneity in the treatment effects alongside the unobserved dimension otherwise known as
resistance to treatment. According to Andresen [56] as well as Abadie and Imbens [57], MTEs generate
selection on unobserved gains. This suggests that individuals who choose treatment because of their
low-resistance capacity are likely to have different gains compared to individuals with high-resistance
capacity. According to Andresen [56], MTEs model specification is based on the generalized Roy
model. This is specified as:
Yj = μj(X) + Uj for j = 0, 1 (7)
Y = DY1 + (1 − D) Y0 (8)
D = I {μD (Z) > V} where Z = (X, Z−) (9)
Y1 and Y0 are the potential outcomes in the treated and untreated state; that is, log of farmers’
income with and without the treatment (CA adoption) which are modeled as functions of observables
covariates. This of course may have the possibility of fixed effects. Equation (9) represents the selection
equation, which contains the latent index of I as an indicator function. This also presents selection
modeling into treatment equation in an implicit form conditioned on the observables covariates
and instruments Z− which does not influence potential outcomes but the probability of treatment.
More importantly, identification of the MTEs model requires the following assumptions:
• Conditional independence: (U0, U1, V) ⊥Z − |X
71
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
• Separability: E(Uj|V, X) = E(Uj|V)
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Probit Regression Estimates
The results in Table 1 reveal the estimates of the marginal effects at the means (MEMs) obtained
from the binary probit model. Findings from the estimation indicated that, for farmers with average
values of being a male gender (0.69), age (52.13), years of formal education (6.88), years of exposure to
CA farming system (12.97), and frequency of farmers’ contact with extension agents (1.92), the predicted
probability of adopting CA farming practices was approximately 0.07 points more compared to female
counterparts. In terms of age, the predicted probability of CA adoption was 0.005 points more for older
farmers than younger ones. However, the predicted probability of CA adoption was0.09 points more
for farmers who had regular contact with extension agents than those with few contacts. Conversely,
the predicted probability of CA adoption was 0.004 point less for farmers with many years of experience
and exposure to CA system than the new entrants. Importantly, the findings revealed that the gender
of the farmers (p < 0.1), age (p < 0.1), years of formal education (a proxy for human capital) (p < 0.1),
years of exposure to CA system (p < 0.1), and frequency of farmers’ contact with extension agents
(p < 0.01) significantly predicted adoption of conservation agriculture in the study area.
Table 1. Marginal effects (at the means) estimates of the binary probit model.
Delta-Method
Adoption of CA dy/dx std. err. z p >|z|
1.gender 0.0670 0.0395 1.70 *** 0.089
Age 0.0052 0.0027 1.92 *** 0.054
years of formal education 0.0085 0.0044 1.95 *** 0.051
years of CA farming experience −0.0042 0.0024 −1.73 *** 0.083
farm size under CA cultivation 0.0102 0.0180 0.57 0.570
log of output 0.0341 0.0238 1.43 0.153
duration of residency 0.0027 0.0022 1.21 0.225
labor contribution 0.0005 0.0013 0.38 0.703
risk attitude 0.1136 0.0955 1.19 0.235
1.access to extension service −0.2377 0.1680 −1.41 0.157
frequency of extension visit 0.0896 0.0357 2.51 * 0.012
regional characteristics
region 2 −0.0237 0.0583 −0.41 0.685
region 3 0.0122 0.0969 0.13 0.900
Note: dy/dx for factor levels is the discrete change from the base level. * p < 0.01; *** p < 0.1 probability levels
respectively. Source: Data analysis, 2018.
Furthermore, to validate the model’s goodness-of-fit, the study applied Hosmer, Lemeshow,
and Sturdivant [58] fit-test procedure. The findings from this test evidently revealed that the model
fits reasonably well (see Table A1).
3.2. Econometrics Results: Effects of Social Capital on CA Adoption
3.2.1. Poisson and Negative Binomial Distribution Models: Empirical Results
The estimation of Poisson distribution regression model (PRM) and the associated goodness-of-fit
tests indicated that the Poisson estimation suffers from over-dispersion problem as expected. Evidently,
the Pearson’s goodness-of-fit test result shows that the distribution of CA practices adoption counts
significantly differs for a Poisson distribution. Consequently, the unacceptably large value obtained
and recorded for chi-square in the post estimation (likelihood ratio test) is an indication that the Poisson
distribution model is not a suitable option because over-dispersion is suspected. This estimation is
72
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
consistent with the guidelines provided by Baum [59]. In lieu of this, it is clearly impossible to make any
meaningful inference from the Poisson regression model estimates to avoid a misleading conclusion.
Given the distribution of data, the negative binomial distribution model was considered an appropriate
option over the Poisson model to address the over-dispersion issue. More so, the incident rate ratio
(IRR) of the negative binomial regression model was computed and reported as suggested by Piza [60]
to show the impact of explanatory variables in terms of a percentage change in the observed response
variable (in this case, counts of CA practices adopted). In essence, “the IRR represents the change in
the response variable in terms of a percentage change, with the precise percentage determined by the
amount the IRR is either above or below 1” [60]. Equally, it is important to stress that, count regression
techniques model the log of incident counts [54].
The findings indicated in Table 2 report the fitted negative binomial regression model. Similarly,
the statistical significance (p < 0.01) of alpha coefficient, and the likelihood ratio test of alpha also attest
to the non-appropriateness of the Poisson regression model. Therefore, this permits a strong rejection
of the null hypothesis that the errors do not exhibit an over-dispersion problem. Hence, the negative
binomial model is deemed fit for describing the influencing dynamics governing smallholder farmers’
adoption count of alternative CA practices in the study area. These procedures and findings are in
tandem with Pedzisa [8] whose study investigated the intensity of adoption of CA by smallholder
farmers in Zimbabwe. The result from Table 2 revealed that, for every one unit increase in the male
gender compared to the female counterpart, the log count of CA practices adopted by female gender
is expected to increase by approximately 0.76; with an estimated statistical significance (p-value) of
0.099 (that is, p < 0.1). A viable explanation for this is that, increase in the count of CA practices
adopted by male gender serves as a positive motivating factor for the female counterpart to increase
the count of CA practices adopted by them in a bid to also achieve maximum benefits accrued from
CA adoption. Similarly, for every unit increase in the number of social groups to which farmers belong,
the log count of CA practices adopted is expected to decrease by approximately 0.20. This suggests
that membership in many social groups significantly (p < 0.01) influences the log count of CA practices
adopted in the study area, though with inverse relationship. This result reinforces earlier findings that
there is a persistent information gap among members of various social groups; rather much focus is
placed on the social events than sharing useful information about improved and beneficial agricultural
techniques such as CA.
Table 2. Negative binomial regression model estimates.
Count of CA Practices Coefficient IRR z-Statistics p > |z|
1.gender −0.2421 0.7850 −1.65 *** 0.099
Age 0.0121 1.0122 1.46 0.145
years of formal education 0.0042 1.0042 0.28 0.777
1.land acquisition 0.0639 1.0660 0.40 0.691
farm size cultivated under CA −0.0125 0.9876 −0.20 0.841
total years of farming experience 0.0134 1.0135 1.90 *** 0.057
frequency of extension visits 0.1345 1.1439 2.03 ** 0.042
1.occupational group membership 0.1483 1.1598 0.92 0.357
1.participation in collective action −0.0753 0.9274 −0.51 0.613
density-social groups membership −0.1956 0.8224 −2.53 * 0.011
diversity of social group members 0.2797 1.3227 0.43 0.664
involvement in decision-making −0.7197 0.4869 −1.18 0.239
constant −0.8022 0.4483 −1.00 0.320
Ln (years of CA farming experience) 1 1
Lnalpha 0.2140 0.0914
Alpha 1.2386 0.1132
Likelihood-ratio test of alpha = 0: chibar2 (01) = 1028.23, Prob >= chibar2 = 0.000. Number of observations = 350,
Log likelihood = −948.64879, Dispersion = mean. Prob > chi2 = 0.0005, Pseudo R2 = 0.0180, LR chi2 (12) = 34.86.
* p < 0.01; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.1 level respectively; IRR = incident rate ratio. Wald test of lnalpha: [lnalpha] _cons = 1;
chi2 (1) = 73.91; prob > chi2 = 0.0000. Source: Data analysis, 2018.
73
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
On the other hand, the results also indicated that, for every one unit increase in human capital
designate-total years of farming experience, the log count of CA practices adopted is expected to
increase by approximately 0.01; suggesting that a unit increase in the years of farming experience
significantly (p < 0.1) increases the log count of CA practices adopted by the smallholder farmers in
the study area. This result is in line with a-priori expectations. Expectedly, frequency of contact with
extension agents was found to have a direct and significant (p < 0.05) influence on the log count of CA
practices adopted. This implies that, for every one unit increase in the frequency of extension visits in
the study area, the log count of CA practices adopted is expected to increase by approximately 0.14.
By implication, such visit is expected to induce positive adoption behavior among the smallholder
farmers. In the same vein, the likelihood ratio test shown in the negative binomial model output is a
test of the over-dispersion parameter alpha. The results of theWald test revealed that, alpha parameter
is significantly different from zero which of course reinforces the earlier submission that the Poisson
regression model is not appropriate for the distribution of the count data under consideration.
According to Piza [60], the interpretation of the results is more or less similar with all the count
regression models. This implies that model parameters tend to communicate the same information in
both Poisson and negative binomial regression models. The author further noted that reporting IRR
can communicate clearly and precisely the influence of explanatory variable influence on the outcome
variable than the model regression coefficient. Hence, it is more tenable to report the incidence rate
ratio of the negative binomial regression model in estimating the influence or effect of the explanatory
variables on the response variable than reporting regression coefficients arising from Poisson or
negative binomial distribution models. This position was also upheld by Cameron and Trivedi [61]
as well as Long and Freese [52]. However, the IRR estimates in Table 2 revealed that, CA adoption
count is expected to decrease by a factor of 0.80 or approximately 20% with every unit increase in
male gender, given that other explanatory variables in the model are held constant. This suggests that
male gender compared to female counterparts is expected to have a rate of 0.80 points less for count of
CA practices adopted. In the same vein, holding all other covariates in the model constant, the IRR
value of 0.82 for density of members in social groups suggests a factor of 0.82 or an approximately 18%
decrease in the count of CA practices adopted. This is also an indication that diffusion of information
about relevant agricultural technologies is a “missing gap” among the social groups in the study area.
Conversely, as expected, if farmers’ years of farming experience were to increase by one unit, count of
CA practices adopted is expected to increase by a factor of 1.01 or approximately 1%, while holding
other explanatory variables in the model constant. Furthermore, the findings also indicated that,
all things being equal, CA adoption count is expected to increase by a factor of 1.14 or approximately
14% with every point/unit increase in the frequency of visits by extension agents, given that all other
explanatory variables in the model are held constant. Conclusively, gender of the farmer (p < 0.1),
farmers’ years of farming experience (p < 0.1), frequency of visits by the extension agents (p < 0.05),
and density of social group membership (p < 0.01) significantly drive the count of CA practices adopted
or rate ratio for CA adoption by smallholder farmers in the study area. Importantly, the basic CA
practices adopted by farmers to preserve the ecosystem services in preferential order are: sequential
rotation practice for different unrelated crops, the use of crop biomass for permanent soil cover, as well
as minimum soil tillage. These findings partly agree with Abebe and Sewnet [62] who investigated
determinants of soil conservation practices adoption in North-West Ethioia. Findings from their study
indicated the influence of farmers’ and plot-level features, human capital, trainings and institutional
support as the main drivers of adoption but never considered the role of social capital in adoption
process which our study emphasized on. The importance of social capital in agricultural technologies
adoption was also noted in the studies conducted by Hunecke et al. [10] and Husen et al. [9].
Similarly, the computed average marginal effects estimates in Table 3 revealed that,
after controlling for other variables, on the average, farmers with appreciable years of farming
experience used about 0.089 (8.9% points) of CA practices more than those with fewer years of
experience in farming, and on average, farmers who were constantly in touch with extension officers
74
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
adopted 0.896 (89.6% points) of CA practices more compared to those with less contact. Conversely,
on the average, farmers who belong to many social groups adopted 1.304 points of CA practices less
than those who belong to fewer social groups. The implication of this is that activities of social groups
in the study area tend to tilt towards social engagement alone other than sharing useful and beneficial
information about agricultural technologies. This result also reinforced the earlier submission made
about the social groups in the study areas. Meanwhile, as indicated in Table A2, the evaluation of
information measures (that is, Akaike’s and Bayesian Information Criterion—AIC and BIC) clearly
revealed that negative binomial regression model fits better, owing to a smaller AIC and BIC statistics
values. This is in line with Williams [54,63].
Table 3. Average marginal effects estimates of the negative binomial model.
Count of CA Practices dy/dx z-Statistics p > |z|
1.gender −1.6770 −1.56 0.118
Age 0.0810 1.43 0.153
years of formal education 0.0281 0.28 0.778
1.land acquisition 0.4187 0.40 0.687
farm size cultivated under CA −0.0834 −0.20 0.841
total years of farming experience 0.0896 1.85 *** 0.064
frequency of extension visit 0.8966 2.00 ** 0.045
1.occupational group membership 0.9605 0.94 0.347
1.participation in collective action −0.4935 −0.51 0.608
density-social groups membership −1.3041 −2.41 ** 0.016
diversity of social group members 1.8650 0.43 0.664
involvement in decision-making −4.7995 −1.17 0.243
* p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and *** p < 0.1, respectively. Note: dy/dx for factor levels is the discrete change from the base
level. Source: Data analysis, 2018.
3.2.2. Goodness-of-Fit Test/Fit-Test Statistics
Evidently, it is clear from the result presented in Table A3 that both the negative binomial model
and zero-inflated negative binomial model consistently fit better than either of the Poisson model or
zero-inflated Poisson model. Importantly, BIC favors the negative binomial regression model while
AIC favors the zero-inflated negative binomial model. This finding also provides the necessary and
sufficient condition that the Poisson regression model is unfit for the estimation in question because it
suffers from an over-dispersion problem. Hence, the justification for the use of the negative binomial
model to examine the effects of social capital viz-a-viz social networks on CA adoption counts in
South-Western Nigeria.
3.2.3. Marginal Treatment Effects Estimates: Empirical Results
The MTE model estimation was fitted through local IV and separate approach estimators with
reference to parametric assumptions. However, the local IV was favored due to the model performance.
The output from this estimation as shown in Table 4 highlights the impact evaluation of the specified
covariates on the outcomes as measured by farmers’ farm income. Likewise, the differences in the
average outcomes across the fitted covariates could be inferred directly from the first panel of the
output as indicated by β0. In this instance, the coefficient for years of farming experience in the
first panel of the output table indicates that one more year of farming experience translates into
approximately 1.83% higher income, albeit with a non-linear effect. Arising from this, it is difficult
to confidently infer that it is the actual effects of extra years of farming experience that drives the
higher income if we fail to observe a strong exogeneity assumption as required on the fitted covariates.
Equally, the coefficient of farm size under CA system from the first panel of the output table also
suggests that an extra hectarage of farm size leads to about 25.22% decrease in farmers’ income.
However, without accounting for strong exogeneity assumption on this factor, this reason alone cannot
75
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
substantiate the farmers’ inability to produce within the production possibility frontier, given the
economies of scale in terms of farm size increase.
Table 4. Parametric marginal treatment effects estimates.
Log of Farmers’ Farm Income Coefficient t p> |t|
β0
1.gender −0.3044 −0.92 0.359
Age −0.0176 −0.78 0.437
years of formal education −0.0099 −0.28 0.782
1.marital status 0.0224 0.08 0.934
total years of farming experience 0.0183 2.37 0.018 **
farm size cultivated under CA −0.2523 −1.73 0.084 ***
total available farm size 0.0894 1.43 0.154
1.credit access 0.0197 0.12 0.902
1.information acquisition −0.0125 −0.07 0.942
index of social capital benefits 0.0825 0.82 0.415
1.access to extension 0.3504 0.65 0.518
frequency of extension visit −0.3312 −0.34 0.218
regional factor
2 0.3914 1.42 0.155
3 −0.1718 −0.34 0.733
Constant 11.74 11.97 0.000 *
β1 − β0
1.gender 6.12 3.08 0.002 *
Age 0.34 2.53 0.012 *
years of formal education 0.41 2.02 0.045 **
1.marital status 2.19 1.38 0.167
total years of farming experience −0.11 −2.63 0.009 *
farm size cultivated under CA 2.93 3.46 0.001 *
total available farm size −1.02 −2.73 0.007 *
1.credit access 0.68 0.76 0.446
1.information acquisition 1.40 1.50 0.134
index of social capital benefits −1.27 −2.19 0.029 **
1.access to extension −8.02 −2.37 0.019 **
frequency of extension visit 5.34 3.14 0.002 *
regional factor
2 −4.29 −2.76 0.006 *
3 6.61 2.22 0.027 **
Constant −68.36 −2.81 0.005 *
K
Mills −30.91 −2.43 0.016 **
Effects
parametric normal MTE model
(Local IV)
Ate −38.03 −2.97 0.003 *
Att 6.84 1.11 0.270
Atut −47.52 −2.87 0.004 *
Late 8.16 1.82 0.069 ***
mprte1 −8.53 −3.05 0.003 *
mprte2 −7.28 −2.50 0.013 *
mprte3 −12.48 −3.57 0.000 *
parametric polynomial MTE model
(Separate approach)
Ate −1.70 −0.33 0.741
Att −2.29 −0.74 0.460
Atut −1.58 −0.25 0.799
Late −0.09 −0.04 0.967
mprte1 −3.74 −1.61 0.107
mprte2 −3.87 −1.55 0.122
mprte3 −4.30 −1.85 0.065
Test of observable heterogeneity, p-value 0.0129 *
Test of essential heterogeneity, p-value 0.0157 *
* p < 0.01; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.1 level respectively. Note: mprtes indicate stylized marginal policy relevant
treatment effects. Source: Data analysis, 2018.
76
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
In a similar manner, the second panel of the output with β1 − β0 in Table 4 explains the observed
differences in treatment effects across covariate values, which also indicates treatment status and
covariate interactions. Thus, the coefficient for gender indicates that a male farmer has 6.12 points
higher advantage in terms of income generated as a result of CA adoption. The coefficient for age of
the farmers suggests that an increase in age translates to about a 34.2% increase in farmers’ income,
while an extra year of formal education suggests a farmer has about a 40.2% increase in income.
However, the estimated coefficient for years of farming experience suggests than an increase in this
farmers’ characteristics translates to approximately 10.86% decrease in the farmers’ income, while
an extra increase in farm size under the CA system suggests about a 2.93-point increase in farmers’
income ceteris paribus. Similarly, an increase in the farmers’ total farm size indicates an approximately
1.02-point decrease in these farmers’ income which is somewhat erroneous and contrary to expectation;
given the economies of scale in terms of farm size increase and all else equal, an increase in total
farm size is expected to drive increased farm output and by extension, increased farmers’ income.
The results also indicated that social capital is a significant factor towards CA adoption, but the benefits
of social interaction is not maximally explored based on the direction of movement of this variable;
that is, an increase in social capital benefits was found to drive an approximately 1.27-point decrease
in farmers’ revenue. More so, the coefficients of extension delivery services (i.e., access and frequency
of access) translated to about an 8.02-point decrease and a 5.34-point increase in farmers’ income,
respectively, suggesting that the performance of an extension delivery system in the study area was not
optimal. Importantly, for regional factor influence, a region (that is, Oyo State region) was arbitrarily
set to be the basis of comparison since few research institutes (such as the International Institute of
Tropical Agriculture (IITA)) are domiciled in this region. Therefore, compared to the counterpart
farmers in region1 (Oyo State), the coefficients of region2 and region3 (Osun and Ondo states) suggest
that an increase in adoption of CA by farmers in these regions will induce about a 4.29-point decrease
and a 6.61-point increase in farmers’ income, respectively, all else equal. However, drawing conclusions
on the treatment by relying on these findings alone without accounting for the possible non-linear
effects may be erroneous and misleading for a valid, tenable, and causal inference about these findings.
To this effect, the third panel in the output table addressed this concern where under different
treatment effects parameters and policy changes. The full distribution of marginal treatment effects
parameters presented include: average treatment effects (ATEs), average treatment effects on the
treated (ATT), average treatment effects on the untreated (ATUT—the spill-over effects), as well as the
policy relevant treatment effects (MPRTEs—which points at the average effects of making marginal
shifts to the propensity scores for both the treated and untreated individuals). This is also necessary
to fully understand the treatment effects heterogeneity in relation to the framework guiding MTEs
potential from a hypothetical policy that shifts the propensity to choose treatment which is the CA
adoption. More importantly, as noted by Zhou and Xie [64], this approach preserves all of the treatment
effects heterogeneity that is consequential for selection bias. In lieu of this, the output from the third
panel highlighting the average difference in the outcome between the treated and untreated groups
revealed that ATT > ATE > ATUT > LATE ≈ 0; such that, income is higher among the farmers who
adopted the CA system than the counterparts who did not adopt CA for whom average income is
virtually zero. More so, these treatment effects parameters are statistically significant at various levels;
but an exception is made of ATT which is not significant at any level. However, MPRTEs estimated
under the stylized policy changes represented by MPRTE1, MPRTE2, and MPRTE3 respectively indicate
a substantial marginal income among these farmers (treated group). It is important to note that the
exact magnitude of MPRTE depends heavily on the form of the policy change, especially under the
normal parametric model which this study considered. For instance, under the first policy change
where the policy changes increase everyone’s probability of adopting CA by the same amount, the
parametric estimate of MPRTE is −8.527, suggesting that an extra effort to adopt CA would translate to
about an 8.5-point decrease in farmers’ income among the marginal entrants on CA adoption. Equally,
under the second policy change where this change favors farmers who appear more likely to adopt CA,
77
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
the marginal income is approximately a 7.3-point decrease if there is a change in policy that permits
and increases everyone’s probability of adopting CA proportionally. Besides, this scenario can even go
as high as about a 12.5-point decrease in income under the third policy change where the change favors
those farmers who appear less likely to adopt CA. However, the same pattern of results is observed
under the polynomial MTEs model. The implication of this is that a different policy experiment could
increase or decrease CA adoption, depending on which individuals it induces to gain and attract the
expected spread and exposure.
In addition, considering the p-values for the two statistical tests shown in Table 4, the first one
represents a joint test for the second panel of the output β1 − β0, which is also a test of whether the
treatment effect differs across the covariates. The second one indicates a test for essential heterogeneity,
which is also a joint test of all coefficients in k(u). From all indications, the first test revealed that
the treatment effects differ significantly across the covariates in the second panel of output while
the second test indicated that the treatment effects vary significantly with unobserved heterogeneity
in the sample. Evidently, there are significant differences in the treatment effects across the sample.
Therefore, this finding suggests that different policy scenarios or situations could increase or decrease
CA adoption, depending on which individuals it induces to attract the expected spread and exposure.
However, for parametric joint normal assumption using local IV, Figures 3 and 4 depict the density
distribution of propensity scores, MTE curve plot, as well as the associated confidence intervals for
the treated and untreated farmers. This will permit to make necessary inferences about the common
support. In this case, downward sloping of the estimated MTE plot is observed, with relatively high
treatment effects at the beginning of the UD distribution (addressing propensity not to be treated),
which eventually declines to negative effects at the right end of the distribution. This pattern of slope
(downward) is in tandem with Roy model which predicts a positive selection on unobservable benefits.
For robust estimation, this study further applied parametric polynomial MTE model and the
separate estimation approach by relaxing the joint normal distribution assumption as well as plotting
MTE curves for both normal and polynomial functions of the MTE models as indicated in Figures 5
and 6, respectively. Here, the MTE plot for normal is downward sloping with negative treatment
effects, which is consistent with the first estimate while MTE plot for the polynomial is relatively
flat at the start of the UD distribution. This eventually slopes upward above zero towards the tail
end of the UD distribution. Similarly, treatment parameter weights were estimated and the resultant
plots are shown in Figure 7. In this case, the MTE curve at the average of the covariate and the MTE
curve for adopters are evidently convex upward; that is, the plots slope consistently upward without
overlapping from the start to the end of UD distribution. This suggests that farmers are motivated to
adopt CA because of the instrumented participation in collective action (social capital) have different
values of covariate. Therefore, this influences the treatment but not the outcome. However, the weight
distribution indicated that the adopters have a much lower probability to have unobserved resistance
towards the mid-point of the distribution. This further suggests that the farmers have MTEs slightly
above the average. Hence, the farmers (adopters) who are influenced by the instrument are the ones
with slightly above average increase in farm income. Similarly, separate estimation procedure was
carried out in fitting the polynomial model by plotting the resulting potential outcomes to investigate
if the observed MTE downward plot trend is generated by upward slopping of Y1, and downward
sloping of Y0, or a combination of the two scenarios. Recall that the difference between outcome for the
treated Y1 and outcome for the untreated Y0 represents MTE. Therefore, the plot as shown in Figure 8
indicated that though these farmers are relatively similar, the farmers who have high resistance to
treatment perform poorly in terms of income realized from farm output than their low resistance
counterparts who are also adopters. Hence, it can be inferred that, all else equal, there is a substantial
effects and impacts of the treatment (that is, adoption of CA practices) on the farmers’ farm income.
78
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
􀀓 􀀕 􀀗 􀀙 􀀛 􀀔􀀓
􀀧􀁈􀁑􀁖􀁌􀁗􀁜
􀀓 􀀑􀀔 􀀑􀀕 􀀑􀀖 􀀑􀀗 􀀑􀀘
􀀳􀁕􀁒􀁓􀁈􀁑􀁖􀁌􀁗􀁜􀀃􀁖􀁆􀁒􀁕􀁈
􀀷􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁈􀁇 􀀸􀁑􀁗􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁈􀁇
􀀦􀁒􀁐􀁐􀁒􀁑􀀃􀁖􀁘􀁓􀁓􀁒􀁕􀁗
Figure 3. Common support for joint normal assumption. Source: Data analysis, 2018.
􀀐􀀕􀀓􀀓 􀀐􀀔􀀓􀀓 􀀓 􀀔􀀓􀀓
􀀷􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗􀀃􀁈􀁉􀁉􀁈􀁆􀁗
􀀓 􀀑􀀔 􀀑􀀕 􀀑􀀖 􀀑􀀗 􀀑􀀘 􀀑􀀙 􀀑􀀚 􀀑􀀛 􀀑􀀜 􀀔
􀀸􀁑􀁒􀁅􀁖􀁈􀁕􀁙􀁈􀁇􀀃􀁕􀁈􀁖􀁌􀁖􀁗􀁄􀁑􀁆􀁈􀀃􀁗􀁒􀀃􀁗􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗
􀀰􀀷􀀨 􀀜􀀘􀀈􀀃􀀦􀀬 􀀤􀀷􀀨
􀀰􀁄􀁕􀁊􀁌􀁑􀁄􀁏􀀃􀀷􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗􀀃􀀨􀁉􀁉􀁈􀁆􀁗􀁖
Figure 4. Marginal treatment effects plot for joint normal assumption. Source: Data analysis, 2018.
􀀐􀀗􀀓 􀀐􀀕􀀓 􀀓 􀀕􀀓 􀀗􀀓
􀀷􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗􀀃􀁈􀁉􀁉􀁈􀁆􀁗
􀀓 􀀑􀀔 􀀑􀀕 􀀑􀀖 􀀑􀀗 􀀑􀀘 􀀑􀀙 􀀑􀀚 􀀑􀀛 􀀑􀀜 􀀔
􀀸􀁑􀁒􀁅􀁖􀁈􀁕􀁙􀁈􀁇􀀃􀁕􀁈􀁖􀁌􀁖􀁗􀁄􀁑􀁆􀁈􀀃􀁗􀁒􀀃􀁗􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗
􀀰􀀷􀀨 􀀜􀀘􀀈􀀃􀀦􀀬 􀀤􀀷􀀨
􀀰􀁄􀁕􀁊􀁌􀁑􀁄􀁏􀀃􀀷􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗􀀃􀀨􀁉􀁉􀁈􀁆􀁗􀁖
Figure 5. Marginal treatment effects plot for polynomial model (relaxing normal assumption). Source:
Data analysis, 2018.
79
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
􀀐􀀔􀀓􀀓 􀀐􀀘􀀓 􀀓 􀀘􀀓
􀀷􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗􀀃􀁈􀁉􀁉􀁈􀁆􀁗
􀀓 􀀑􀀔 􀀑􀀕 􀀑􀀖 􀀑􀀗 􀀑􀀘 􀀑􀀙 􀀑􀀚 􀀑􀀛 􀀑􀀜 􀀔
􀀸􀁑􀁒􀁅􀁖􀁈􀁕􀁙􀁈􀁇􀀃􀁕􀁈􀁖􀁌􀁖􀁗􀁄􀁑􀁆􀁈􀀃􀁗􀁒􀀃􀁗􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗
􀀱􀁒􀁕􀁐􀁄􀁏 􀀳􀁒􀁏􀁜􀁑􀁒􀁐􀁌􀁄􀁏
􀀰􀁄􀁕􀁊􀁌􀁑􀁄􀁏􀀃􀀷􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗􀀃􀀨􀁉􀁉􀁈􀁆􀁗􀁖
Figure 6. Marginal treatment effects plot for normal and polynomial models. Source: Data analysis, 2018.
􀀓 􀀑􀀓􀀕 􀀑􀀓􀀗 􀀑􀀓􀀙
􀀺􀁈􀁌􀁊􀁋􀁗􀁖
􀀤􀀷􀀨
􀀯􀀤􀀷􀀨
􀀷􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗􀀃􀁈􀁉􀁉􀁈􀁆􀁗
􀀐􀀔􀀓 􀀐􀀘 􀀓 􀀘 􀀔􀀓 􀀔􀀘
􀀓 􀀑􀀔 􀀑􀀕 􀀑􀀖 􀀑􀀗 􀀑􀀘 􀀑􀀙 􀀑􀀚 􀀑􀀛 􀀑􀀜 􀀔
􀀸􀁑􀁒􀁅􀁖􀁈􀁕􀁙􀁈􀁇􀀃􀁕􀁈􀁖􀁌􀁖􀁗􀁄􀁑􀁆􀁈􀀃􀁗􀁒􀀃􀁗􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗
􀀰􀀷􀀨 􀀰􀀷􀀨􀀃􀀋􀀯􀀤􀀷􀀨􀀌
􀀕􀀶􀀯􀀶 􀀯􀀤􀀷􀀨􀀃􀁚􀁈􀁌􀁊􀁋􀁗􀁖
􀀰􀁄􀁕􀁊􀁌􀁑􀁄􀁏􀀃􀀷􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗􀀃􀀨􀁉􀁉􀁈􀁆􀁗􀁖
Figure 7. Marginal treatment effects plot polynomial (using late memory). Source: Data analysis, 2018.
􀀔􀀗􀀑􀀘 􀀔􀀘 􀀔􀀘􀀑􀀘 􀀔􀀙
􀀳􀁒􀁗􀁈􀁑􀁗􀁌􀁄􀁏􀀃􀁒􀁘􀁗􀁆􀁒􀁐􀁈􀁖
􀀐􀀘 􀀓 􀀘 􀀔􀀓
􀀷􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗􀀃􀁈􀁉􀁉􀁈􀁆􀁗 􀀓 􀀑􀀔 􀀑􀀕 􀀑􀀖 􀀑􀀗 􀀑􀀘 􀀑􀀙 􀀑􀀚 􀀑􀀛 􀀑􀀜 􀀔
􀀸􀁑􀁒􀁅􀁖􀁈􀁕􀁙􀁈􀁇􀀃􀁕􀁈􀁖􀁌􀁖􀁗􀁄􀁑􀁆􀁈􀀃􀁗􀁒􀀃􀁗􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗
􀀰􀀷􀀨 􀀤􀀷􀀨 􀀼􀀓 􀀼􀀔
􀀰􀁄􀁕􀁊􀁌􀁑􀁄􀁏􀀃􀀷􀁕􀁈􀁄􀁗􀁐􀁈􀁑􀁗􀀃􀀨􀁉􀁉􀁈􀁆􀁗􀁖
Figure 8. Marginal treatment effects plot (separate approach other than local IV). Source: Data
analysis, 2018.
80
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
4. Concluding Remarks and Policy Statements
Conclusively, the study found that farmers’ years of farming experience (p < 0.1), frequency
of visits by the extension agents (p < 0.05), and social capital viz-a-viz density of social groups
membership (p < 0.05) significantly determined the count of CA practices adopted with varying
degrees by smallholder farmers in the study area. Although social capital expressed in terms of
membership of occupational group and diversity of social group members also had positive influence
on the count of CA practices adopted, but these features were not significant owing largely to the
“information gaps” about the improved agricultural technologies. Suffice it to say that, there is the
possibility of apathy among the farmers within the social structure to acquire more information about
the improved agricultural technology because of the long-term benefits associated with adoption of
CA alternative practices; hence, activities of various social groups, importantly, farmers’ occupational
group largely center on social engagements.
Therefore, from the findings, the study highlighted the relevance of gender in lieu of the count
of CA technologies adopted. Equally, the skewed pattern of CA adoption towards male gender as a
significant predictor of adoption was also revealed. Therefore, there is a need to address the core issue
of women marginalization in farming activities and farming related policies, most especially the bias
towards women in land tenure arrangement. Importantly, there is need for a greater re-visitation of
extension delivery systems associated with diffusion of information about CA practices in Nigeria
through continuing and ongoing supports of extension services using farmer-led extension approaches
facilitated by public extension agencies and NGOs saddled with outsourced extension services.
On a general note, findings from count model mirror the significant importance and positive impact of
social capital accumulation viz-a-viz social networks in the adoption process. The underlying aim is
to understand peer group influence within a social structure impact diffusion of information among
networks members and how to constantly explore these links to promote effective dissemination
and flow of information on improved agricultural technologies towards sustained adoption of CA
in Nigeria. Similarly, since policy relevant treatment effects indicated that different policy scenarios
or situations could increase or decrease CA adoption, depending on which individuals it induces
to attract the expected spread and exposure, there is a need to intensify the effort and policies
to change the reality of farming especially among smallholder farmers in Africa and Nigeria in
particular, from the traditional, inappropriate and unproductive tillage-based farming systems to
a more and highly-productive, profitable, sustainable, and environmentally sound conservation
agriculture system.
Author Contributions: S.O.O. conceptualized the study, conducted the research, and wrote the draft manuscript
while A.M. reviewed, edited, and validated the manuscript. All authors therefore approved the final manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Appendix A
Table A1. Quantiles of estimated probabilities (Goodness-of-fit test).
Group Prob Obs_1 Exp_1 Obs_0 Exp_0 Total
1 0.0677 5 1.7 30 33.3 35
2 0.0896 1 2.8 34 32.2 35
3 0.1158 2 3.6 33 31.4 35
4 0.1336 6 4.4 29 30.6 35
5 0.1603 3 5.2 32 29.8 35
6 0.1829 4 6.0 31 29.0 35
7 0.2089 4 6.8 31 28.2 35
8 0.2431 12 7.9 23 27.1 35
9 0.3086 10 9.4 25 25.6 35
10 0.5211 14 13.2 21 21.8 35
Number of observations = 350, number of groups = 10. Hosmer–Lemeshow chi2 (8) = 15.47, prob > chi2 = 0.0507.
Source: Data analysis, 2018.
81
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
Table A2. Akaike’s information criterion and Bayesian information criterion.
Model Obs. ll(null) ll(model) df AIC BIC
Poisson 350 −1548.42 −1462.76 13 2951.53 3001.68
Negative
Binomial 350 −966.08 −948.65 14 1925.30 1979.31
Source: Data analysis, 2018.
Table A3. Tests and Fit Statistics.
PRM BIC = 376.870 AIC = 6.769 Prefer Over Evidence
vs. NBRM
BIC = −171.005 diff = 547.875 NBRM PRM Very strong
AIC = 5.193 diff = 1.576 NBRM PRM
LRX2 = 553.733 prob = 0.000 NBRM PRM p = 0.000
vs. ZIP
BIC = 121.142 diff = 255.728 ZIP PRM Very strong
AIC = 6.006 diff = 0.764 ZIP PRM
Vuong = 5.241 prob = 0.000 ZIP PRM p = 0.000
vs. ZINB
BIC = −160.147 diff = 537.017 ZINB PRM Very strong
AIC = 5.191 diff = 1.578 ZINB PRM
NBRM BIC = −171.005 AIC = 5.193 Prefer Over Evidence
vs. ZIP
BIC = 121.142 diff = −292.147 NBRM ZIP Very strong
AIC = 6.006 diff = −0.813 NBRM ZIP
vs. ZINB
BIC = −160.147 diff = −10.858 NBRM ZINB Very strong
AIC = 5.191 diff = 0.002 ZINB NBRM
Vuong = 1.323 prob = 0.093 ZINB NBRM p = 0.093
ZIP BIC = 121.142 AIC = 6.006 Prefer Over Evidence
vs. ZINB
BIC = −160.147 diff = 281.289 ZINB ZIP Very strong
AIC = 5.191 diff = 0.815 ZINB ZIP
LRX2 = 287.147 prob = 0.000 ZINB ZIP p = 0.000
Source: Data analysis, 2018. Note that: PRM = Poisson regression model; NBRM = Negative binomial regression
model; ZIP = Zero inflated poisson model; ZINB = Zero inflated negative binomial regression model.
References
1. Oyakhilomen, O.; Zibah, R.G. Agricultural Production and Economic Growth in Nigeria: Implication for
Rural Poverty Alleviation. Q. J. Int. Agric. 2014, 53, 207–223.
2. Kassie, M.; Pender, J.; Yesuf, M.; Köhlin, G.; Bluffstone, R.; Mulugeta, E. Estimating returns to soil
conservation adoption in the Northern Ethiopian Highlands. Agric. Econ. 2008, 38, 213–232. [CrossRef]
3. IIRR; ACT. Conservation Agriculture. A manual for farmers and extension workers in Africa. In International
Institute of Rural Reconstruction, Nairobi; African Conservation Tillage Network: Nairobi, Kenya, 2005.
4. Silici, L. The Role of Social Capital in the Adoption and the Performance of Conservation Agriculture:
The Practice of Likoti in Lesotho. Ph.D. Thesis, Departimento di Economia, Universita degli Studi Roma Tre,
Rome, Italy, 2009.
5. Kassam, A.; Friedrich, T.; Derpsch, R.; Lahmar, R.; Mrabet, R.; Basch, G.; González-Sánchez, E.J.; Serraj, R.
Conservation Agriculture in the dry Mediterranean climate. Field Crops Res. 2012, 132, 7–17. [CrossRef]
6. Ngwira, A.R.; Johnsen, F.H.; Aune, J.B.; Mekuria, M.; Thierfelder, C. Adoption and extent of conservation
agriculture practices among smallholder farmers in Malawi. J. Soil Water Conserv. 2014, 69, 107–119.
[CrossRef]
7. Kassam, A.; Friedrich, T.; Derpsch, R.; Kienzle, J. Overview of the worldwide spread of Conservation
Agriculture. Field Actions Sci. Rep. 2015, 8, 1–12.
8. Pedzisa, T.; Rugube, L.; Winter-Nelson, A.; Baylis, K.; Mazvimavi, K. The Intensity of adoption of
Conservation agriculture by smallholder farmers in Zimbabwe. Agrekon 2015, 54, 1–22. [CrossRef]
9. Husen, N.A.; Loos, T.M.; Siddig, K.H. Social Capital and Agricultural technology Adoption among Ethiopian
Farmers. Am. J. Rural Dev. 2017, 5, 65–72. [CrossRef]
82
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
10. Hunecke, C.; Enger, A.; Jara-Rojas, R.; Poortvliet, P.M. Understand the Role of Social Capital in Adoption
Decisions: An Application to Irrigation Technology. Agric. Syst. 2017, 153, 221–231. [CrossRef]
11. D’Souza, A.; Mishra, A.K. Adoption and Abandonment of Partial Conservation Technologies in Developing
Economies: The Case of South Asia. Land Use Policy 2018, 70, 212–223. [CrossRef]
12. Silici, L.; Ndabe, P.; Friedrich, T.; Kassam, A. Harnessing sustainability, resilience and productivity through
conservation agriculture: The case of likoti in Lesotho. Int. J. Agric. Sustain. 2011, 9, 1–8. [CrossRef]
13. Calegari, A.; Ashburner, J. Further Experiences with Conservation Agriculture in Africa. In Proceedings of
the 18thWorld Congress of Soil Science, Philadephia, PA, USA, 9–15 July 2006.
14. Montemurro, F.; Fiore, A.; Campanelli, G.; Tittarelli, F.; Ledda, L.; Canali, S. Organic fertilization, green
manure, and vetch mulch to improve organic zucchini yield and quality. HortScience 2013, 48, 1027–1033.
15. EIP-AGRI Focus Group. Soil Organic Matter in Mediterranean Regions. 2015. Available online: http:
//www.ec.europa.eu/eip/agriculture/sites/agri-eip (accessed on 20 October 2018).
16. Deligios, P.A.; Tiloca, M.T.; Sulas, L.; Buffa, M.; Caraffini, S.; Doro, L.; Sanna, G.; Spanu, E.;
Spissu, E.; Urracci, G.R.; et al. Stable nutrient flows in sustainable cropping systems of globe artichoke.
Agron. Sustain. Dev. 2017, 37, 1–12. [CrossRef]
17. Ndah, H.T.; Schuler, J.; Uthes, S.; Zander, P. Adoption Decision Theories and Conceptual models of
Innovations Systems. In Proceedings of the CA2 Africa Inception Workshop, Leibniz-Centre for Agricultural
Landscape Research (ZALF), Nairobi, Kenya, 2–4 March 2010.
18. Todaro, M.P.; Smith, S.C. Economic Development, 10th ed.; Pearson Addison Wesley: Boston, MA, USA, 2009.
19. Hobbs, P.R. Conservation agriculture: What is it and why is it important for future sustainable food
production. J. Agric. Sci. 2007, 145, 127–137. [CrossRef]
20. De Lucas, A.I.; Molari, G.; Seddaiu, G.; Toscano, A.; Bombino, G.; Ledda, L.; Milani, M.; Vittuari, M.
Multidisciplinary and Innovative Methodologies for Sustainable Management in Agricultural Systems.
Environ. Eng. Manag. J. 2015, 14, 1571–1581.
21. Deligios, P.A.; Chergia, P.A.; Sanna, G.; Solinas, S.; Todde, G.; Narvarte, L.; Ledda, L. Climate change
adaptation and water saving by innovation irrigation management applied on open field globe artichoke.
Sci. Total. Environ. 2019, 649, 461–472. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Foster, A.D.; Rosenzweig, M.R. Microeconomics of Technology Adoption. Annu. Rev. Econ. 2010, 2, 395–424.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Abdulai, A.; Owusu, V.; Bakang, J.E. Adoption of safer irrigation technologies and cropping patterns:
Evidence from Southern Ghana. Ecol. Econ. 2011, 70, 1415–1423. [CrossRef]
24. Awotide, B.A.; Diagne, A.; Awoyemi, T.T. Agricultural Technology Adoption, Market Participation and
Rural Farming Households’Welfare in Nigeria. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference of the
African Association of Agricultural Economists, Hammamet, Tunisia, 22–25 September 2013.
25. Abdulai, A.; Huffman, W. The Adoption and Impact of Soil and Water Conservation Technology:
An Endogenous Switching Regression Application. Land Econ. 2014, 90, 26–43. [CrossRef]
26. Ademola, A.O.; Olujide, M.G. Soil Conservation Practices of Arable Crop Farmers in Atisbo Local
Government Area of Oyo State, Nigeria. Adv. Res. 2014, 2, 878–888. [CrossRef]
27. Afolami, C.A.; Obayelu, A.E.; Vaughan, I. Welfare impact of adoption of improved cassava varieties by rural
households in SouthWestern Nigeria. Agric. Food Econ. 2015, 3, 1–17. [CrossRef]
28. Obisesan, A.A. Causal Effect of Off-Farm Activity and Technology Adoption on Food Security in Nigeria.
AGRIS On-Line Pap. Econ. Inform. 2015, 7, 3–11.
29. Wossen, T.; Bergen, T.; Di-Falco, S. Social capital, risk preference and adoption of improved farm land
management practices in Ethiopia. Agric. Econ. 2015, 46, 81–97. [CrossRef]
30. Pino, G.; Toma, P.; Rizzo, C.; Miglietta, P.; Peluso, A.; Guido, G. Determinants of farmers’ intention to adopt
water saving measures: Evidence from Italy. Sustainability 2017, 9, 77. [CrossRef]
31. Kirton, M. Adaptors and innovators: A description and measure. J. Appl. Psychol. 1976, 61, 622–629.
[CrossRef]
32. Rogers, E.M. What are innovators like? Theory Pract. 1963, 2, 252–256. [CrossRef]
33. Oreszczyn, S.; Lane, A.; Carr, S. The role of networks of practice and webs of influencers on farmers’
engagement with and learning about agricultural innovations. Agric. Syst. 2010, 26, 404–417. [CrossRef]
34. Lollo, E. Toward a theory of social capital definition: Its dimensions and resulting social capital types.
In Proceedings of the 14thWorld Congress of Social Economics, Glasgow, UK, 20–22 June 2012.
83
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
35. Hanifan, L.J. The Rural School Community Center. Ann. Am. Acad. Political Soc. Sci. 1916, 67, 130–138.
[CrossRef]
36. Nath, T.K.; Inoue, M.; Pretty, J. Formation and Function of Social Capital for Forest Resource Management
and the Improved Livelihoods of Indigenous People in Bangladesh. J. Rural Community Dev. 2010, 5, 104–122.
37. Putnam, R. Social capital: Measurement and consequences. Canad. J. Policy Res. 2001, 2, 41–51.
38. Bowles, S.; Gintis, H. Social capital and community governance. Econ. J. 2002, 112, F419–F436. [CrossRef]
39. Grootaert, C.; Bastelaer, T.V. Understanding and Measuring Social Capital: A Synthesis of Findings and
Recommendations from the Social Capital Initiatives; Social Capital Initiative Working Paper No. 24;
The World Bank: Washington, DC, USA, 2001.
40. Woolcock, M. The place of social capital in understanding social and economic outcomes. Can. J. Policy Res.
2001, 2, 11–17.
41. McCarthy, N.; Dutilly-Diane, C.; Drabo, B. Cooperation, collective action and natural resources management
in Burkina Faso. Agric. Syst. 2004, 82, 233–255. [CrossRef]
42. Jagger, P.; Luckert, M.K. Investments and returns from cooperative and household managed woodlots in
Zimbabwe: Implications for rural afforestation policy. Land Use Policy 2008, 25, 139–152. [CrossRef]
43. Aker, J.C. Social Networks and Household Welfare in Tanzania: Working Together to Get out of Poverty; University
of California-Berkely: Berkeley, CA, USA, 2007.
44. United Nations. Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform; Department of Economic and Social Affairs
(UNDESA): New York, NY, USA, 2015; Available online: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgs
(accessed on 9 August 2018).
45. Nguezet, P.M.D.; Diagne, A.; Okoruwa, V.O.; Ojehomon, V.E. Impact of Improved Rice Technology Adoption
(NERICA varieties) on Income and Poverty among Rice Farming Households in Nigeria: A Local Average
Treatment Effect (LATE) Approach. Q. J. Int. Agric. 2011, 50, 267–291.
46. Oparinde, A.; Banerji, A.; Birol, E.; Ilona, P. Consumer Willingness to Pay for Biofortified Yellow Cassava: Evidence
from Experimental Auctions in Nigeria; HarvestPlus Working Paper 13; International Food Policy Research
Institute: Washington, DC, USA, 2014; pp. 1–2.
47. Obisesan, A.A.; Amos, T.T.; Akinlade, R.J. Causal Effect of Credit and Technology Adoption on Farm
Output and Income: The Case of Cassava Farmers in South-West Nigeria. In Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference of the African Association of Agricultural Economists, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia,
23–26 September 2016.
48. Awotide, B.A.; Karimov, A.A.; Diagne, A. Agricultural technology adoption, commercialization and
smallholder rice farmers’ welfare in rural Nigeria. Agric. Food Econ. 2016, 4, 1–24. [CrossRef]
49. National Space Research and Development Agency of Nigeria (NASRDA). Map of Nigeria Showing
South-Western Region of Nigeria; NASRDA: Abuja, Nigeria, 2018.
50. Corbeels, M.; Apina, T.; Koala, S.; Schuler, J.; Triomphe, B.; El Mourid, M.; Tittonell, P. Impact and Adoption
of Conservation Agriculture in Africa: A Multi-Scale and Multi-Stakeholder Analysis; Centre de Coopération
Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour le Développement: Montpellier, France, 2010.
51. Wooldridge, J.M. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2010;
pp. 265–268.
52. Long, J.S.; Freese, J. Regression Models for Categorical Dependent Variables using STATA, 3rd ed.; Stata Press:
College Station, TX, USA, 2014.
53. Sebopetji, T.O.; Belete, A. An application of Probit analysis to factors affecting small-scale farmers’ decision
to take credit: A case study of the Greater Letaba Local Municipality in South Africa. Afr. J. Agric. Res. 2009,
4, 718–723.
54. Williams, R. Models for Count Outcomes. University of Notre Dame. 2015. Available online: https:
//www3.nd.edu/~{}rwilliam/ (accessed on 7 August 2017).
55. Bruin, J. Newtest: Command to Compute New Test. UCLA: Statistical Consulting Group, 2006.
Available online: https://stats.idre.ucla.edu/stata/ado/analysis/ (accessed on 2 April 2018).
56. Andresen, M.E. Exploring marginal treatment effects: Estimation using STATA. Stata J. 2018, 18, 118–158.
[CrossRef]
57. Abadie, A.; Imbens, G.W. Matching on the estimated propensity score. Econometrica 2016, 84, 781–807.
[CrossRef]
84
Sustainability 2019, 11, 716
58. Hosmer, D.W., Jr.; Lemeshow, S.A.; Sturdivant, R.X. Applied Logistic Regression, 3rd ed.; Wiley: Hoboken, NJ,
USA, 2013.
59. Baum, C.F. Models for Count Data and Categorical Response Data; Boston College and DIW Berlin,
University of Adelaide: Adelaide, Australia, 2010; Available online: www.bc.edu/ec-c/s2013/327/
S5CountCategorical0511.slides.pdf/ (accessed on 2 April 2018).
60. Piza, E.L. Using Poisson and Negative Binomial Regression Models to Measure the Influence of Risk on Crime
Incident Counts; Rutgers Center on Public Security: Newark, NJ, USA, 2012.
61. Cameron, A.C.; Trivedi, P.K. Regression Analysis of Count Data, 2nd ed.; Cambridge University Press:
New York, NY, USA, 2013.
62. Abebe, Z.D.; Sewnet, M.A. Adoption of soil conservation practices in North Achefer District, Northwest
Ethiopia. Chin. J. Popul. Resour. Environ. 2014, 12, 261–268. [CrossRef]
63. Williams, R. Scalar Measures of Fit: Pseudo R2 and Information Measures (AIC and BIC); University of Notre
Dame: Notre Dame, IN, USA, 2018; Available online: https://www3.nd.edu/~{}rwilliam/ (accessed on
7 August 2018).
64. Zhou, X.; Xie, Y. Heterogeneous Treatment Effects in the Presence of Self-Selection: A Prospensity Score
Perspective. 23 January 2018. Available online: https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/xzhou/ (accessed on
22 August 2018).
© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
85
sustainability
Article
Approach for Designing Context-Specific, Locally
Owned Interventions to Reduce Postharvest Losses:
Case Study on Tomato Value Chains in Nigeria
Christine Plaisier 1,*, Milindi Sibomana 2, Johannes van derWaal 3, Luud Clercx 3,
Coen P. A. van Wagenberg 1 and Youri Dijkxhoorn 1
1 Wageningen Economic Research, 2595 BM Den Haag, The Netherlands;
coen.vanwagenberg@wur.nl (C.P.A.v.W.); youri.dijkxhoorn@wur.nl (Y.D.)
2 M.AGRO-SPEC Ltd., P.O. Box 6734 Kigali, Rwanda; sylversi@yahoo.co.uk
3 AgroFair Projects B.V., 2991 LN Barendrecht, The Netherlands;
hans-willem.van.der.waal@AGROFAIR.NL (J.v.d.W.); Luud.clercx@agrofair.nl (L.C.)
* Correspondence: christine.plaisier@wur.nl; Tel.: +31-70-3358330
Received: 29 November 2018; Accepted: 31 December 2018; Published: 7 January 2019
	

Abstract: Development projects on interventions to reduce postharvest losses (PHL) are often
implemented largely independently of the specific context and without sufficient adaptation to
the needs of people who are supposed to use them. An approach is needed for the design and
implementation of specific, locally owned interventions in development projects. Our approach is
based on Participatory Development and includes Living Lab and World Cafés. We applied the
approach in a case study on reducing PHL in tomato value chains in Nigeria. The approach consists of
nine steps. After scoping the sector, selected value chain stakeholders (case: farmers, transporters,
traders, retailers) were gathered in Living Lab workshops. In the workshop, participants analyzed
the product, information, and monetary flows in their own value chain, identified causes for PHL,
and selected potential interventions to reduce these (case: plastic crates instead of raffia baskets to
transport tomatoes). Selected interventions were implemented, tested, and monitored in pilot projects
with the workshop participants. This was followed by an evaluation workshop. At the end of the
case study, 89% of participants bought crates to keep using them in their value chain. Our approach
resulted in context-specific, locally owned interventions to reduce PHL in the case study on tomato
value chains in Nigeria. Its application in other countries, commodities, or interventions is needed to
determine the effectiveness of the approach in a broader scope.
Keywords: value chain development; participatory approach; context-specific interventions;
behavioural change; postharvest losses; tomato; Nigeria; supply chain; raffia basket; plastic crate
1. Introduction
Feeding Africa’s urban population is a task that is becoming ever more challenging. Currently,
urban areas in Africa comprise of 472 million people. That number is expected to double over the next
25 years as more migrants are pushed into the cities from the countryside, with annual growth rates of
up to 4% for the largest cities [1]. Good health and wellbeing, sustainable cities and communities, and
responsible consumption and production are all relevant sustainable development goals (SDG) in this
respect [2]. To ensure these SDGs are met, the provision of good-quality food in adequate quantities
is of crucial importance. Much attention has been paid to the supply side of food by improving the
yield and productivity of agricultural production. Less attention has been paid to the importance of
optimal supply networks, which are the links between agricultural production and (urban) consumers.
In such supply networks, a large amount of the food produced for human consumption is lost or
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247; doi:10.3390/su11010247 86 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
wasted as a result of damage, rotting, pests, and diseases [3,4]. Reducing such so-called postharvest
losses (PHL) is a key pathway to food and nutrition security in sub-Saharan Africa [5].
Many initiatives have been taken to reduce PHL in sub-Saharan Africa [5,6]. Development
agencies, governments, non-governmental organizations, and private companies have been keen to
invest in installations and equipment to improve supply networks, such as by putting in place
cold stores and collective market structures. However, Ika [7] found that 50 to 64% of value chain
development projects in Africa fail because of inadequate beneficiary needs analysis, poor stakeholder
management, and overemphasis on financial and technical feasibility at the expense of social, cultural,
environmental, and political feasibility. In other words, such projects suffer from a lack of ownership
and insufficient adaptation of interventions to the needs of the people who were supposed to use
them. Such projects have become “white elephants”—beautiful temporary gifts, but useless [8].
One cause for this is the fact that innovations to reduce PHL in sub-Saharan Africa were developed
and tested without sufficient participation of local stakeholders [5]. Existing guides for value chain
development are designed to implement interventions largely independently of the specific context,
and insufficiently incorporate co-creation, co-testing, and co-analyzing of interventions with local
stakeholders [9]. As a consequence, there is still a significant lack of adoption of the innovations
presented, resulting in ever-present high postharvest losses observed across various agricultural value
chains in Nigeria. Ideally, all actors, from producers to transporters and traders, are involved in
problem identification, solution generation, pilot testing, and intervention calibration. This would
improve the adoption potential of generated solutions. An approach is needed for the design of such
context-specific and locally owned interventions to reduce PHL. This study aims to develop and test
such an approach.
Our study follows the thinking of Participatory Development, which advocates the active
participation of stakeholders in the decision-making process [10,11]. Participatory methods can
enhance the uptake and sustainable use of new (technological) solutions [5]. In our approach for
designing context-specific, locally owned interventions to reduce PHL, we included the Living Lab as
a participatory process to co-create, co-test, and co-analyze the interventions with relevant value chain
stakeholders. The Living Lab is a user-centered development concept with two essential elements,
namely a real-life test and experimentation environment [12]. The Living Lab provides for a real-world
setting, involving multiple stakeholders from multiple organizations, stages, or backgrounds, and their
interaction. Application of the Living Lab results in users who are aware that they are co-involved
in and co-owners of the innovation process [12]. The Living Lab helps create trust and commitment,
which are prerequisites for sustainable and effective cooperation in supply chains [13].
We applied the approach to reducing PHL in a case study on reducing PHL in tomato value
chains in Nigeria. Nigeria is the most populous country of sub-Saharan Africa, with an estimated
population of about 190 million people. Nigeria is one of the leading producers of tomatoes in Africa.
According to the statistics from the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, in 2016,
Nigeria ranked number one in Africa in areas planted with tomatoes and number four in the world,
and number 14 in production volume in the world. Tomatoes are an important vegetable in the local
Nigerian cuisine, because they are used daily [14]. According to Adeoye et al. [15], over 90% of studied
consumers in the city of Ibadan in Nigeria purchase tomatoes in the urban market. Of these consumers,
over 90% purchase fresh tomatoes. Compared to other developing countries in Africa, Nigeria lags
behind in agricultural productivity development due to long periods of underinvestment in public
infrastructure, such as roads, energy generation, and clean water supply [16]. Tomato supply chains are
affected by a lack of investments in storage, packaging, transportation and marketing infrastructure,
and are highly fragmented. Prior research has highlighted numerous problems in the tomato supply
network in Nigeria, especially around PHL. Pre-consumer PHL range from an estimated 25% [17] to
as high as 50% [18,19]. Some research suggested improvements to reduce PHL [6,20,21]. However,
the results of these studies were often fragmented in time, space, and focus, and did not address the
question on how to effectively test and embed suggested improvements in the value chain. Potential
87
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
solutions need a strong support base across the value chain as Nigerian tomato value chains are often
informal and fragmented, and lead firms or value chain captains are lacking.
This study’s research aim was to develop an approach with which to design context-specific,
locally owned interventions to reduce PHL. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
In Section 2, we present the approach for designing and testing context-specific interventions to reduce
PHL that are locally owned by all value chain actors. In Section 3, we present the results of the
approach applied to the PHL in tomato value chains in Nigeria. Section 4 provides the discussion, and
Section 5 the conclusions.
2. Materials and Methods
The approach for designing and testing context-specific interventions to reduce PHL, which are
locally owned by all value chain actors (Figure 1) was developed based on consultations with an
international and local research team and actors in the tomato value chain in Nigeria. The approach is
based on Participatory Development, which actively includes stakeholders in the decision-making
process [10,11]. In the approach, we applied Living Lab workshops [12] with a “World Café” setting [22].
The research team consisted of three Dutch, two Nigerian, and one Rwanda expert from development
organizations with extensive experience in implementing solutions in developing countries, with three
experts from Wageningen Economic Research with significant experience in value chain development
and impact evaluation of such solutions, and three experts fromWageningen Food & Biobased Research
on PHL. The research team was supported by local enumerators for translation and monitoring the
pilot projects. Members of the research team were involved in developing all steps of the approach.
The actors in the tomato value chain were involved in steps 4 to 9 of the approach. The approach
consists of nine steps, which are described below.
Figure 1. Approach for designing context-specific solutions to reduce postharvest losses, which are
locally owned by all value chain actors.
88
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
2.1. Case Study Selection
In Step 1, the case studies to be analyzed are defined. The product(s) and geographical region(s) of
production and consumption are selected for which improvements in PHL are potentially viable.
To this end, a literature review and or expert knowledge can be used.
2.2. Scoping Background
Step 2 of the approach consists of gathering in-depth background information on the PHL in
the selected case studies from key value chain actors (such as producers, transporters, processors,
traders, and retailers), and key informants from the government and other relevant organizations, e.g.,
development organizations. For example, this can be done through a scoping survey and interviews
among the stakeholders. It addresses the general characteristics of the value chain actors (gender, age,
education, and production), the value chain and marketing characteristics (purchase and sale points,
payment moment, bargaining power, customer relationship) and the potential causes for PHL related to
shelf life, tomato yield, and transport efficiency. The appropriate selection strategy of participants
depends on the context and envisioned scope. Ideally, a random sampling strategy is applied with
representation of the diversity participants of various value chain stages, production tiers, i.e., small to
commercial farmers, single-vehicle to fleet hauliers, and wholesalers to retailers to determine the status
quo in the different areas.
2.3. Participant Identification and Selection
In Step 3 of the approach, a limited number of value chain actors are selected for participation in
Living Lab workshops and pilot projects. Potential participants represent all actors active in the value
chain. Again, the appropriate selection strategy of participants depends on the context, envisioned
scope, and the project period and timing, but the selection should be based on three criteria:
(1) Participants are active actors actually working in the value chain in at least one of the activities,
such as production, transportation, processing, trading, or retailing;
(2) Participants are already trading with at least one other participant in the value chain;
(3) Participants are willing to implement potential innovations to reduce PHL and are committed to
participate for the entire project trial.
2.4. Value Chain Mapping Including Monetary and Information Flows
In Step 4, the participants map their own value chain, including monetary and information
flows. To this end, the participants are brought together in a Living Lab workshop. Living Lab
workshops are especially suited when network partners, together with end-users need to develop
innovation processes to address specific challenges [23]. Involvement of value chain actors in the
problem contextualization and innovation development process is critical for the development of
sustainable innovation solutions [24,25]. The Living Lab workshop also offers opportunities for
informal contacts and thus helps to improve the bonds between the value chain actors. [26]. With
Higgins and Klein [26], we believe that inviting the respective parties to engage in the Living Lab’s
real-world experiment is a promising option because they can be more willing to overcome established
attitudes and obstacles, as long as it is “only” in an experimental setting. As such, it may enable the
establishment of forums and supportive environments for innovators which can otherwise be stuck
in existing adversarial relations, hierarchies, and traditional practices. The experimental setting also
encourages a critical attitude and searching for creative solutions. Moreover, the Living Lab itself can
give a symbolic meaning to the process of facilitating broader collective action. The Lab can signal
commitment, momentum of change, and the opportunity to act and take charge of developments that
are critical for the development of the participating parties.
In the Living Lab workshop, participants are grouped in round tables, with each table containing
actors from each part of the chain, effectively forming a platform to engage on the different aspects of
89
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
the value chain. This Living Lab workshop follows a structured approach in three stages. Stage 1 of
the Living Lab workshop is a feedback and validation session discussing the outcomes of the scoping
survey. In Stage 2, the participants map the connections in, and product flows through their own
supply chain. This involves free mapping to show connections in the supply chain as perceived by
the stakeholders and identification of points of tomato losses (hotspots) in the supply chain scheme.
Participants are asked to brainstorm and identify all possible stakeholders and relations. Some work
out a linear map, others a network map, with less or more detail. This exercise is useful to visualize
and identify the players and relations in the chain. The final map is visualized on paper.
After mapping the supply chain, a depiction of monetary and information flows in the
supply chain is created (Stage 3). Participants are asked to identify different inflows and outflows
(or processes) of money, information, and tomato operations at the levels of farmers, hauliers, traders,
and retailers, as the illustration or precision of the relations between the stakeholders of the chain.
In Stage 3, the participants together identify the main bottlenecks in their chains, as well as
possible solutions (based on the maps and information flows depicted in the previous stages).
The participants start with a broad approach in which every actor identifies the main problems
in the chain. The problems can vary from lack of quality inputs, to the state of the road, to the
institutional environment.
2.5. Identification of Bottlenecks and Potential Solutions
In Step 5, the main bottlenecks causing PHL and potential solutions for these bottlenecks are
identified. Each group of participants identifies bottlenecks in their own value chain, considering
the value chain map, and monetary and information flows identified in the previous step. Then,
each group identifies possible solutions for each identified bottleneck.
The bottlenecks and potential solutions are presented in tabular form, per value chain actor and
per link of the value chain. This is followed by a plenary session in which each group presents their
results to all other groups. After the plenary session, a so-called “World Café” [22] is organized,
in which participants from each group, except a reporter, move to another group to observe and
discuss the bottlenecks and solutions of the other group. The café’s ambience allows for a more
relaxed and open conversation to take place. This type of conversation is a creative process for
leading collaborative dialogue, sharing knowledge, and creating possibilities for action in groups of all
sizes [27]. The environment is set up like a café, with paper-covered round tables. Participants are
provided with pens, paper, and stickers and are encouraged to draw and record their conversations
on the paper tablecloths or other materials to capture free-flowing ideas as they emerge. Participants
discuss the issue at hand around their table, and they move to a new table at regular intervals.
One participant (the table host) remains and summarizes the previous conversation to the newly
arrived participants. By moving participants around the room, the conversations at each table are
cross-fertilized with ideas from other tables. At the end of the process, the main ideas are summarized
in a plenary session, and follow-up possibilities are discussed [22,27,28]. Members of the groups can
indicate their preferences on the worksheets with material like stickers, pencils, symbols (for example,
applying green dots for preferred solutions). The other groups review the worksheet and can also
indicate their preference (e.g., with a blue dot). Participants then reconvene at their original group
to revise their own bottlenecks and solutions. This results in a final list of bottlenecks and potential
solutions for each group.
2.6. Selection of Solutions with Good Potential
In Step 6, participants identify the most promising solutions for application in pilot projects.
Out of all the potential solutions portrayed, each group identifies the two most important bottlenecks
in their own value chain and the two most viable potential solutions for these bottlenecks, which
they could commit to testing in a pilot project. The potential solutions should be guided by a set of
SMART criteria—i.e., the solutions should be Specific (what is included/excluded in the activities),
90
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
Measurable (what is the envisaged result: how to measure), Achievable/Attractive (achievable within
the scope of the project, in potential self-sustainable, is the solution attractive, what is the role division),
Realistic (can we do it given the constraints), and Time-Specific (within the available timeframe and
with milestones set).
Next in the second “World Café” set-up, each group receives the selected bottleneck-intervention
combinations of another group. Each group votes for which of these bottleneck-intervention
combinations is the most feasible. At the end of this activity, all votes for each bottleneck-intervention
combination are added. The combinations with the most votes from all the groups are then selected to
be implemented in pilot projects. The number of bottleneck-intervention combinations selected for
pilot projects cannot be too large, because the participants will have to implement these and too many
pilots implemented simultaneously could negatively affect the implementation.
2.7. Preparation and Training Participants
In Step 7 of the approach, all preparatory actions for the pilot projects are performed. This includes
logistics, permissions, and any other organization needed before implementation, as well as training
of the participants of the workshop on the implementation of the selected interventions and training
of enumerators for evaluation of the impact of the solutions. When all logistics, hardware, and
permissions are ready, an official kick-off workshop of approximately two days is organized to prepare
the pilot projects with the value chain actors and the research team. In this workshop, all risks and
potential challenges in the implementation of the pilot projects are discussed and anticipated for as
much as possible. The participants design the appropriate starting and ending dates, the planning,
timelines, and requirements, and again, all commit fully to the implementation. It is important that all
agree on the set-up and planning and that the process is highly participatory. All should be given the
opportunity to express their ideas and doubts, which enables a constructive discussion and customized
design before the official take-off.
2.8. Execution of Pilot Projects
In Step 8, the value chain actors put the proposed solutions in practice and the local research
team monitor the results of the intervention. To overcome the initial errors, doubts, and hiccups
encountered along the way, it is important to have a local representative of the team available to coach
all participants during the implementation period. This person must be able to reach all participants,
be aware of the planning of each value chain, and able to monitor the processes. To monitor the extent
to which the intervention solves the bottlenecks, an intervention-specific monitoring tool must be
developed, and a local monitoring team should be established.
2.9. Evaluation of Pilot Projects
In Step 9, the research team, together with all participants, evaluates each pilot project and
identified bottlenecks for continuation and upscaling. A workshop is organized to discuss and validate
the results of the monitoring tool and the participants’ personal experiences. Besides, participants are
also challenged to outline the basic features for continuation of the project that would benefit all the
value chain actors.
3. Results
3.1. Case Study Selection
In this study, we selected tomato value chains delivering from two regions in Nigeria with a
tomato cultivation tradition to consumers in the urban areas of Lagos and Ibadan. The first group of
value chains runs from farms in the South-West (Oyo, Osun, Ondo, and Katsina states) to the Mile
12 market in Lagos or Sasa market in Ibadan, with distances from 95 to 305 km from farm to retailer.
The second group of value chains runs from farms in the North (Kano and Kaduna states) to retailers
91
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
in Lagos (Okomaiko, Agege, Iyana Ipaja markets), with distances from 1085 to 1316 km from farm to
retailer. With regard to this study, the sites and value chains of interest were chosen mainly because:
• The North-South value chain represents the highest volume of movement of tomatoes in the
country, so it was important to understand dynamics there with regard to tomato losses and
identify mitigation strategies;
• The South-West value chain also represents a secondarily high-volume tomato value chain in
the country and with proximity to the highest consumption area, therefore this study would
potentially uncover different tomato loss drivers, which may also result in different loss mitigation
strategies which could be just as effective.
3.2. Scoping Background
Scoping surveys were held with actors from the supply chains from both regions. In the South-West,
actor-specific scoping surveys were conducted among 48 farmers, 44 transporters, and 48 traders/retailers.
The survey for traders/retailers was performed on the largest markets in the area, Sasa and Mile 12,
which were the major end markets for the supply chain of tomatoes. In the North, the scoping surveys
were conducted among 151 farmers, 89 transporters, and 109 traders/retailers.
Survey participants were randomly selected after the researchers had “followed the chain”, which
means that in an initial visit (prior to survey execution), the researchers had interviews with various
actors in all parts of the supply chain in the areas of interest, e.g., the market (traders, retailers,
wholesalers), farmer groups, and individual farmers who often supplied these markets (or supply
other market actors), as well as hauliers who transported fresh produce (including tomatoes). These
initial meetings enabled identification of the chain structure and networks, which enabled the research
team to have access to participants who were later selected for the survey.
Simple random sampling and a structured questionnaire was employed as per [20,29]. The main
criteria for participants in the survey was that they had to be involved commercially in the tomato
chain regardless of level—in other words, small, medium, or large-scale growers, traders, or hauliers
had to be involved directly in growing, transporting, or selling the product.
Limitations in the sampling methodology are acknowledged, and this technique was chosen
primarily to give the researchers insight into the status quo of the tomato value chain in Nigeria,
which would be compared to the outcomes of similar, more in-depth studies, e.g., by the Growth
and Employment in States- Wholesale and Retail sector project (GEMS4) [20,29]. Similar to these
studies, the data was analyzed using descriptive statistics, such as frequency counts and percentages.
The software IBM SPSS Statistics version 17 (International Business Machines Corporation, New
York, USA) was used for data analysis. Furthermore, validation of these results were to be done
in a workshop setting where in-depth questions and discussions would allow the researchers more
perspective into the different value chains. The workshop participants, as described in the next section,
were not limited to scoping survey participants only.
Table 1 provides the general characteristics of the survey respondents, Table 2 the chain and
marketing characteristics of the tomato value chains of the respondents, and Table 3 the potential causes
for PHL in these tomato value chains mentioned by the respondents. The majority of respondents
were male, a member of an association (either producer, transporter, or trader), and used raffia baskets
as packaging material. This is similar to the results reported by [20,29]. The majority of transactions
took place at the farm gate, collection centers, or markets. Poor infrastructure conditions, unsuitable
tomato varieties, and poor postharvest handling were identified as critical drivers of PHL for farmers,
and transporters were more concerned with poor infrastructure conditions, roadblocks, and poor
postharvest handling. In both regions, limited postharvest infrastructure and unsuitable tomato
varieties were identified as critical drivers of PHL for farmers, while traders were more concerned
with poor transportation conditions. The challenges highlighted from these activities are consistent
with earlier findings published by [19]. This served as an indication that the sampling method was
effective enough to broadly capture the state of the tomato value chain in Nigeria, which was the
aim of this step.
92
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
Table 1. General characteristics of the respondents to a survey in tomato value chains from the South-West and North of Nigeria to the urban centers of Lagos and
Ibadan held in 2017.
Characteristic Option
South-West North
Producer
(n = 48)
Transporter
(n = 44)
Trader/Retailer
(n = 48)
Producer
(n = 151)
Transporter
(n = 89)
Trader/Retailer
(n = 109)
Gender (%) Male 85 100 55 100 100 99
Education (%)
Primary school (in)complete 23 46 52 32 28 25
Secondary school (in)complete 46 48 43 34 44 24
Arabic school 2 72 45 74
Higher education 32 5 7 4 10 11
Age (%)
25–35 years 28 23 27 40 36 37
36–45 years 24 57 64 39 60 38
>45 years 48 43 9 21 3 24
Member of
association (%) Yes 92 85 72 64 60 77
Main function of
association (%) 1
Information and training 73 42
Seeds and other inputs 56
Sales 46
Government liaison 45 31
Transport regulations 41
(Off)loading coordination 41
Collect Levies 23
Price setting 19
Packaging
material (%) 1
Raffia basket 63 100 90 102 97 100
Sack 2 100 2 3
Crate 13 8 1 3
Mixed/other 6 2 10 4
Tomato
Growing
Experience (%)
1–3 years 35 13
3–10 years 28 53
>10 years 37 34
Tomato land
size (ha)
Wet season 2 3
Dry season 1.2 2.7
Productivity
(kg/ha)
Wet season 3523 10,455
Dry season 4838 14,698
Tomato variety
used (%)
Hybrid-Padma F1 43
Carrot-Open-pollinated variety 30
UC82B-Open-pollinated variety 72
Roma vf-Open-pollinated variety 21
Rio-Open-pollinated variety 7
Other 27
93
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
Table 1. Cont.
Characteristic Option
South-West North
Producer
(n = 48)
Transporter
(n = 44)
Trader/Retailer
(n = 48)
Producer
(n = 151)
Transporter
(n = 89)
Trader/Retailer
(n = 109)
Truck/car
ownership (%) 1
Owns the truck 41 24
Driver of individual/company 85 76
Truck/car
backhaul (%)
Empty 95 17
Loaded 5 83
1 Multiple answers were possible, so the sum can exceed 100%.
Table 2. Value chain and marketing characteristics of tomato value chains from the South-West and North of Nigeria to the urban centers of Lagos and Ibadan,
mentioned by respondents in response to a survey held in 2017.
Characteristic Option
South-West North
Producer
(n = 48)
Transporter
(n = 44)
Trader/Retailer
(n = 48)
Producer
(n = 151)
Transporter
(n = 89)
Trader/Retailer
(n = 109)
Farmer sale
point,
transporter/trader/retailer
collection point
(%) 1
Market 56 42
Collection Centre 44 70 50 58 92 51
Farm gate 25 50 27 43
Trader 17 14
Other 10 3
Bargaining
power (%) Yes 72 52
Knowledge of
in-transit losses
(%)
Yes 36 43
Market
information
knowledge (%)
Yes 72 87
Moment buyer
pays farmer (%)
1
In advance 2 9
At sale (farm gate) 88 56
Afterwards 6 15
Combination 11 20
Trader customer
(%)
Wholesale 71 56
Retail 29 44
Trader/retailer
customer base
(%) 1
Fixed 60 54
Changing 40 92
1 Multiple answers were possible, so the sum can exceed 100%.
94
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
Table 3. Potential causes for postharvest losses in tomato value chains from the South-West and
North of Nigeria to the urban centers of Lagos and Ibadan, mentioned by respondents in response to a
survey held in 2017.
Characteristic Option
South-West North
Producer
(n = 48)
Transprter
(n = 44)
Producer
(n = 151)
Transporter
(n=89)
Shelf life
limiting
factors (%) 1
Lack of/poor infrastructure 33 58 44 49
Unsuitable/poor variety 23 38 38 52
Poor (post-)harvest handling 17 44 61 26
Poor packaging 19 29 15 29
Low level/lack of technology and skills 23 33
Poor market facilities 33 35
Lack of market incentives 17 35
Harvest at very ripe stage 17 15
Other 29 13 8
Factors
affecting
tomato
yield (%) 1
Pests and diseases 75 70
Excess rainfall 44 17
Drought/lack of water 23 29
Bad seed 21 29
Low level/lack of technology and skills 17 23
Lack of fertilizer 13 43
High temperature 26
Factors limiting
efficient
transport (%) 1
Road blocks/delays 84 81
Poor/lack of infrastructure 80 88
Road congestion 59 29
Vehicle breakdown 43 35
Delays in (off)loading 11 16
Poor market infrastructure 9 10
Other 14 14 11
1 Multiple answers were possible, so the sum can exceed 100%.
3.3. Selection of Participants
Participants were selected from the value chain actors that participated in the scoping survey (for
the simple random sampling strategy of the survey respondents, see Section 2.2). The following criteria
were applied to select and invite the participants of the workshop (see also Section 2.3): (i) Participants
are active actors actually working in the value chain in at least one of the activities, such as production,
transportation, processing, trading, or retailing; (ii) participants are already trading with at least
one other participant in the value chain; and (iii) participants are willing to implement potential
innovations to reduce postharvest losses, and commit to participate for the entire project period.
In the North, 27 value chain actors (15 farmers, 4 transporters, 5 traders, 3 retailers) were selected,
and in the South-West, 24 were selected (8 farmers, 4 transporters, 6 traders, 6 retailers). Budgetary
constraints limited the number of participants and number of workshops.
3.4. Value Chain Mapping Including Monetary and Information Flows
Two Living Lab workshops were held, one in Ibadan (South-West) and one in Kano (North).
Each workshop lasted for two days. The Living Lab workshops started with a plenary session,
discussing and validating the outcomes of the scoping surveys. In both workshops, five groups of
participants were established. Each group represented a value chain and contained at least one farmer,
one transporter, one trader, and one retailer. Local enumerators were present to guide participants
through the assignments and to assist and translate where needed.
In the South-West, two groups indicated that product flow was from producers to the traders
via transporters, while one group specified that producers were directly connected with retailers and
traders without transporters. Farmers in the South-West have more interaction with the end markets,
and take their own produce to the market or bear the cost of transportation to the market. This could be
95
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
related to the shorter distance between production and the market in the South-West (100–200 km)
compared to the North (800–1,200 km). In contrast to the South-West, aggregation markets were
present in the North.
Monetary and information flows were generally similar in the South-West and North. A difference
is that farmers and traders in the South-West indicated to have more expenses compared to those in
the North. This could be an actual reality, or it may be that farmers and traders in the South-West
were more aware of their outgoing expenditures. Bribes to police or security officials was noted more
frequently in the South-West value chain compared to the Northern value chain. With regard to
information flows, it was evident that actors in the North were more active in sharing information on
supply–demand variations in the market, i.e., glut-scarcity periods.
3.5. Identification of Bottlenecks and Potential Solutions
The main bottlenecks causing PHL were the occurrence of pests and diseases, low access to
(quality) inputs, poor road infrastructure, inappropriate harvest and postharvest handling practices,
and the seasonality of the production system. Access to good quality and unadulterated insecticides
and quality control of this by the government were identified as solutions to prevent losses due to
pests and diseases. Access to good quality seed from seed companies at an affordable cost and from
an easy to access site to their communities were identified as a solution to prevent losses due to low
access to (quality) inputs. As a specific problem, participants from the South-West mentioned the
challenge caused by herdsmen moving their animals across tomato fields. In the North, a suggested
solution for delivery delays was reduction of checkpoints on the road. However, the same actors also
acknowledged insecurity as an issue and recommended increased police presence on the roads. In the
North, participants identified bad harvesting practices as an important factor contributing to losses,
with a recommendation for training on harvesting and handling of tomatoes on the farm to reduce
losses. In the South-West, participants mentioned the hours of exposure which harvested tomatoes
had to high temperatures while waiting for the transporter, as an important possible cause of PHL.
Significant reduction in quality occurred during transportation, which attributed to the use of raffia
baskets and which were often overloaded and squeezed during stowage, resulting in mechanical
damage. A proposed solution to this was the use of plastic crates. The seasonal production with a glut
period was identified in both regions as an issue, although on-site engagement with farmers showed
that it was a more dominant challenge in the North. Participants in the North indicated that managing
product flows during the glut and scarcity periods could be an opportunity for improving efficiency
and reducing tomato loss in this chain.
3.6. Selection of Solutions with Good Potential
In each region, the participants mentioned and agreed upon two solutions to be tested in a
pilot project by the participants. In this paper, we will only present the solution selected in both
regions, which is sufficient to show the functioning of the approach. The solution agreed upon was the
transport of tomatoes in returnable plastic crates instead of in the usual raffia baskets to reduce losses.
The solution not only had a 100% support base among the participants, but it also met the
criteria of being specific, measurable, achievable (and affordable), realistic, and possible within the
time boundaries of the project.
3.7. Preparation of Pilot Projects
The project team purchased the necessary materials and equipment, such as 600 plastic crates,
and 15 analogue and 5 digital scales for weighing. A tool to measure and monitor the impact of the
plastic crates on PHL both in weight and in quality was developed. Local enumerators were recruited
for applying the measurement tool and monitoring the pilot projects during execution.
96
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
In each region, all participants and local enumerators were gathered in a two-day workshop
to design and implement the plan for each solution, and to train the participants on the use of the
solutions and on the tool to measure the impact of the solutions. In the South-West, 24 value chain
actors and five local enumerators participated, and in the North, 27 value chain actors and four local
enumerators took part. Per value chain and region, the participants designed an implementation plan
which included a start and end date, responsibilities, tasks, and roles of each value chain actor, and the
organization and logistics of the pilot project adapted to the local situation. Many issues and concerns
were raised, such as the amount of tomatoes which were to be in a crate compared to the raffia baskets
(as tomato amounts are measured in baskets), price-setting, the returning of crates, and payment for
the transporter (payment per item carried). During the workshop, participants and local enumerators
could familiarize themselves with the plastic crates, and they were provided with tomatoes, crates,
baskets, and scales to understand how they should be comparing them to the raffia baskets in terms of
handling, packing, weighing, and pricing. A draft version of the measurement tool was discussed with
all participants and local enumerators and customized to ensure it was applicable to the local situation.
For example, the quality grades in the measurement tool were aligned with the actual quality grades
used in the value chain. In the South-West, three quality grades, A, B, and C, were used, whereas in
the North, an additional grade, D was used. Points of weight measurement in the value chain were
at the farm directly after harvest, at the farm just before transport, at arrival at the wholesale market,
at the wholesale market just before leaving, and at arrival on the retail market. The tomatoes were
only graded on quality at the first and last point of measurement to minimize disturbance. Batches of
tomatoes were divided over crates and baskets and moved in the same transport vehicle to ensure
similar conditions. The crates and baskets were marked at the farm, and these were followed in person
throughout the value chain by the local enumerators. During the workshop, all participants and local
enumerators received detailed training on the final measurement tool.
3.8. Execution of Pilot Projects
The pilot project on plastic crates in the South-West was conducted in December 2017 and in the
North from February–March 2018. The plastic crates were tested compared to the conventional raffia
baskets as a control. Tomatoes were collected from five farms in the South-West and three farms in the
North on two separate days within a two-week period. Handling of the tomatoes was done as closely
as possible to the normal situation in all links of the value chain. At farm level, tomatoes were sorted
as usual by the farm workers during harvesting. Rotten or heavily damaged tomatoes were left on the
field. After the enumerators weighed and graded the harvest, part of the harvested tomatoes were
stacked in crates and the rest in baskets. It was ensured that quality grades were divided equally over
crates and baskets. Any further preparation for the market until pickup by a transporter was done
as usual. In some cases, the tomatoes were waiting for various hours. Before the actual loading took
place, the tomatoes were weighed again to identify possible losses. The tomatoes were transported
to the wholesale markets, in cars, small vans, and buses in the South-West and in large lorries in the
North. At the market, the crates and raffia baskets were weighed again. In most cases, the tomatoes
arrived around midnight at the market and were bought by the retailers in the early morning. Just
before the retailers collected the tomatoes, they were weighed again to identify any possible weight
loss. At arrival on the retail market, the tomatoes in both crates and baskets were weighed and graded
using the same grades as used on the farm level.
3.9. Evaluation of Pilot Projects
Members of the project team analyzed the data collected with the measurement tool [30]. Crates
were found to outperform baskets in both regions. Weight loss was between 5 and 12% lower with
crates than with baskets. Similarly, the loss in best-quality A-grade tomatoes was between 16 and
20% lower with crates than with baskets. Here, we do not present further details on the PHL results
that were measured in the pilot project, because the aim of this paper is to present the approach
97
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
for designing context-specific interventions owned by local value chain actors. The details on the
PHL results can be found in [30]. The results were discussed and presented in two-day evaluation
workshops with the participating actors, one in the South-West and one in the North. All participants
were invited to evaluate the pilot projects, and were guided with group assignments to facilitate the
evaluation of their experiences and to ensure that all participants could express themselves. Value
chain actors were also challenged to outline the basic components of a business plan that would benefit
all the value chain actors.
All participants were happy to find the reduction in losses by using crates instead of baskets.
Each value chain actor mentioned the benefits of crate use at each specific stage in the chain. Overall,
retailers and traders stated a preference for tomatoes transported in crates compared to raffia baskets,
because of the increased volume of quality products. Transporters appreciated the ease associated
with loading and offloading crates, and it also meant that the wooden planks and grass thatch used to
separate two layers of raffia baskets during transport were not needed anymore. Farmers appreciated
the ease of postharvest handling and the stacking possibilities of crates. All participants mentioned that
the introduction of plastic crates could also contribute to the standardization of measuring units and
the introduction of scales—each crate had the same size and could contain around 23 kg of tomatoes.
At the time, several types and sizes of baskets were being used, and weighing scales were not used.
A large majority of participants (87%) preferred plastic crates to raffia baskets. Only 9% of participants
preferred raffia baskets over plastic crates, and this was specifically for the greater level of convenience
in returning from the retailer to the farm and stocking in a car. The remaining 4% of participants
did not have a preference. After the evaluation pilot, the participants were provided the opportunity
to purchase the plastic crates against half the price of a new crate. 67% of the participants bought the
plastic crates they were using during the pilot, and 22% bought not only the crates used in the pilot
but also some additional ones. This indicates a high adoption rate of the implemented intervention
with plastic crates, and shows that it was a good fit for the local context.
In the final oral evaluation session, all participants expressed their appreciation of the approach
applied. According to the participants, the design of the project helped them to overcome their
initial skepticism, and to build trust in the innovation itself and in their co-value chain members.
They were proud to be part of a community of change by acting and taking charge of an important
developmental change.
However, the evaluation workshops also revealed several challenges and hiccups.
The participants identified bottlenecks, which needed attention before upscaling could take place.
Because of the current structure and organization of the value chain, not all actors could benefit equally.
Retailers and traders had most of the financial gains. Most farmers did not benefit from the increased
value of the tomatoes transported in crates, because pricing between farmer and trader occurred at
the farm before transportation in the majority of cases. Transporters could even have a lower income,
because they were paid per item and the transporter carried less items when transporting the larger
and rigid crates compared to the smaller and more flexible baskets. Another challenge mentioned was
the returning of the empty crates. In addition, no common agreement was reached on which actor(s)
should purchase and own the crates and how this ownership could be protected. Crates are more
expensive than baskets, but should last up to five years instead of one year. A final challenge was
found in setting prices, because at the time, pricing was based on the size of a raffia basket and not on
the weight of the content. The benefit of reduced losses was not totally reflected in a higher price when
scales were not used, and price was set on the size of packing material.
4. Discussion
This paper presents an approach for designing context-specific interventions owned by local
value chain actors. The approach was applied to develop an intervention to improve food security by
reducing PHL in the tomato value chain in Nigeria. The approach considers contextual and cultural
factors by actively involving value chain stakeholders working together to design an intervention.
98
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
This solved potential problems which can occur in top-down initiatives following a technical–rational
project management approach, as put forward by Ika [7] and Robinson and Torvik [8]. Although
many guides for value chain development include some value chain actor participation to design
interventions, most guides result in interventions implemented largely independently of the specific
context, due to insufficient co-creation, co-testing, and co-analyzing of potential interventions with
value chain stakeholders [9]. Especially in a value chain such as the tomato value chain in Nigeria,
with a low level of governance and fragmented, undifferentiated local markets, active participation is
needed to reach sustainable interventions owned by value chain actors. Potential solutions are taken off
the drawing board and trialed in practice, testing both the technical feasibility of potential interventions
and how the interventions are embedded in the business models of existing value networks. As such,
our approach ensures the support base, commitment, and ownership of participants, which are
crucial conditions for sustainable and effective development interventions aiming at a certain change.
The Living Lab and World Café which were set up also stimulated trust among and between the
participants, i.e., trust in the intervention itself but also in their peers, which were the other actors in
their value chain.
However, this approach also has its limitations; it is relatively resource-intensive in terms of
financial and human resources, and the Living Lab and World Café only allowed for a limited
number of participants. The whole approach is also time-consuming.
The results of the pilot projects in the case study in Nigeria showed that the PHL were lower for
tomatoes transported in plastic crates compared to those transported in raffia baskets, and that the
percentage of good-quality tomatoes was higher when transported in plastic crates than in baskets.
In an experiment which simulated transport, [31] also found that the mechanical damage to tomatoes
resulting from impact and vibration was lower when using plastic crates compared to when using
raffia baskets. The majority of the pilot project participants were convinced of the benefits of using
crates instead of baskets, and experienced actual financial gains when using crates. This indicates
that the application of our approach to reduce PHL in tomato value chains in Nigeria resulted in
context-specific interventions that were owned by the pilot project participants.
Our approach resulted in a context-specific intervention owned by the local value chain actors
who participated in the pilot projects. Ownership of an intervention in a pilot project is a first step for
improvement of the efficiency and effectiveness in all tomato value chains in Nigeria. The pilot project
participants are only a small group of all actors active in the tomato sector in Nigeria, and tomato
consumers were also not incorporated. Several challenges for a broader implementation of the plastic
crates in tomato value chains in Nigeria were identified, alongside the following issues: (i) Investment
in and ownership of the crates; (ii) an effective crate-returning system; (iii) distribution of the financial
benefits between value chain actors; (iv) pricing of transactions in the value chain; and (v) lack of
using scales and factual measures to define the price. When upscaling the pilot project in our case
study to national Nigerian level, the increase in tomato availability and increase in quality requires
a food system approach to analyze the national impact. This analysis should include the different
roles and reactions to these increases in the different value chain actors, consumers of all income
levels, and other stakeholders. At national level, new governance mechanisms might be needed in
tomato value chains, such as producer, trader, or transporter networks or associations, chain leadership
development, or third parties with sufficient financial and organizational strength for the acquisition
and leasing of crates and weighing scales.
We developed the approach for context-specific, locally owned interventions to reduce PHL and
applied it in a case study on reducing PHL in tomato value chains in Nigeria by introducing plastic
crates to transport the tomatoes. In this case study, the purchase of the crates by the value chain
participants in the study after the pilot projects showed that these stakeholders intended to use the
crates after the project had finished. Application of the approach to reduce PHL in other countries
or commodities or in other interventions to improve food and nutrition security is required to also
determine its effectiveness in a broader scope of development projects.
99
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
5. Conclusions
This study provided an approach for designing, implementing, and testing context-specific
interventions to reduce PHL with local value chain actors. In a Living Lab workshop withWorld Cafés,
value chain actors together analyzed their own value chain and identified bottlenecks and potential
interventions to solve each bottleneck. The most promising bottleneck intervention combination was
tested in pilot projects, i.e., replacing the raffia baskets with plastic crates during tomato transport.
The vast majority of pilot project participants in the case study of PHL in the tomato value chain in
Nigeria indicated a preference of plastic crates to raffia baskets and bought crates after the project
finished. This shows that the approach was effective in designing a context-specific, locally owned
intervention. Application in other countries, commodities, or interventions is recommended to
determine the effectiveness of the approach in a broader scope.
Author Contributions: C.P. facilitator living lab workshops and field work coordination. J.v.d.W. inception phase
and contextual study. L.C. and C.P.A.v.W.: Project Management. M.S.: facilitator living lab workshops and
data analyst and reporter survey. Y.D.: postharvest losses protocol design and testing, training local researchers,
field measurement.
Funding: The authors wish to thank the Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Sustainable Logistics (MDTD-SL) administrated
by the World Bank, CGIAR-A4NH Flagship Food Systems for Healthier Diets, and the KB-22 theme “Global food
and nutrition security” ofWageningen UR funded by the Dutch Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality
(grant KB-22-002-010) for funding this study.
Acknowledgments: Thanks also goes to Frits Blessing, Peace Eruore Quadt (N-N-Solutions), Olalekan Emmanuel
Akinwekomi and Thompson Ogunsanmi, both from the International Fertilizer Development Centre, for local
support in Nigeria in design and execution of this project.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The founding sponsors had no role in the
design of the study, in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data, in the writing of the manuscript, and in
the decision to publish the results.
References
1. Lall, S.V.; Henderson, J.V.; Venables, A.J. Africa Cities. Opening Doors to the World; International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the World Bank: Washington, DC, USA, 2017.
2. United Nations. Transforming our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Resolution A/RES/70/1;
General Assembly of the United Nations: New York, NY, USA, 2015.
3. FAO. Global Food Losses and Food Waste-Extent, Causes and Prevention; Food and Agricultural Organization of
the United Nations: Rome, Italy, 2011.
4. Sheahan, M.; Barrett, C.B. Review: Food loss and waste in sub-saharan Africa. Food Policy 2017, 70, 1–12.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Affognon, H.; Mutungi, C.; Sanginga, P.; Borgemeister, C. Unpacking postharvest losses in sub-saharan
Africa: A meta-analysis. World Dev. 2015, 66, 49–68. [CrossRef]
6. Sibomana, M.S.; Workneh, T.S.; Audain, K. A review of postharvest handling and losses in the fresh tomato
supply chain: A focus on sub-saharan Africa. Food Secur. 2016, 8, 389–404. [CrossRef]
7. Ika, L.A. Project management for development in Africa: Why projects are failing and what can be done
about it. Proj. Manag. J. 2012, 43, 27–41. [CrossRef]
8. Robinson, J.A.; Torvik, R. White elephants. J. Public Econ. 2005, 89, 197–210. [CrossRef]
9. Donovan, J.; Franzel, S.; Cunha, M.; Gyau, A.; Mithöfer, D. Guides for value chain development:
A comparative review. J. Agribus. Dev. Emerg. Econ. 2015, 5, 2–23. [CrossRef]
10. Mohan, G. Participatory development: From epistemological reversals to active citizenship. Geogr. Compass
2007, 1, 779–796. [CrossRef]
11. Cornwall, A. Beneficiary, Consumer, Citizen: Perspectives on Participation for Poverty Reduction; Swedish
International Development Cooperation Agency: Stockholm, Sweden, 2002.
12. Dell’Era, C.; Landoni, P. Living lab: A methodology between user-centred design and participatory design.
Creat. Innov. Manag. 2014, 23, 137–154. [CrossRef]
13. Morgan, R.M.H.; Hunt, S.D. The commitment-trust theory of relationship marketing. J. Mark. 1994, 58, 20–38.
100
Sustainability 2019, 11, 247
14. Grubben, G.; Klaver, W.; Nono-Womdim, R.; Everaarts, A.; Fondio, L.; Nugteren, J.A.; Corrado, M.
Vegetables to combat the hidden hunger in Africa. Chron. Horticult. 2014, 54, 24–32.
15. Adeoye, I.B.; Adegbite, O.O.; Fashogbon, A.E.; Layade, A.A. Consumer purchasing behavior for tomatoes.
Int. J.Veg. Sci. 2016, 22, 259–265. [CrossRef]
16. Leke, A.; Fiorini, R.; Dobbs, R.; Thompson, F.; Suleiman, A.; Wright, D. Nigeria’s Renewal: Delivering
Inclusive Growth in Africa’s largest Economy; McKinsey Global Institute, McKinsey & Company: Michigan, NY,
USA, 2014.
17. Bolarin, F.M.; Bosa, S.O. Post-harvest losses: A dilemma in ensuring food security in Nigeria. J. Nat. Sci. Res.
2015, 5, 151–154.
18. Ibeawuchi, I.I.; Okoli, N.A.; Alagba, R.A.; Ofor, M.O.; Emma-Okafor, L.C.; Peter-Onoh, C.A.; Obiefuna, J.C.
Fruit and vegetable crop production in Nigeria: The gains, challenges and the way forward. J. Biol. Agric.
Healthc. 2015, 5, 194–202.
19. Muhammad, R.H.; Hionu, G.C.; Olayemi, F.F. Assessment of postharvest knowledge of fruit and vegetable
farmers in Garun Mallam L.G.A. of Kano, Nigeria. Int. J. Dev. Sustain. 2012, 1, 510–515.
20. Adepoju, A.O. Post-harvest losses and welfare of tomato farmers in Ogbomosho, Osun State, Nigeria.
J. Stored Prod. Postharvest Res. 2014, 5, 8–13.
21. Ugonna, C.U.; Jolaoso, M.A.; Onwualu, A.P. Tomato value chain in Nigeria: Issues, challenges and strategies.
J. Sci. Res. Rep. 2015, 7, 501–515. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Brown, J.; Isaacs, D.; The World Café Community. The World Café: Shaping Our Futures through Conversations
that Matter; Barrett-Koehler Publishers, Inc.: San Francisco, CA, USA, 2005.
23. Katzy, B.R.; Pawar, K.; Thoben, K.D. Editorial: A living lab research agenda. Int. J. Prod. Dev. 2012, 17, 1–7.
24. Eriksson, M.; Niitamo, V.P.; Kulkki, S.; Hribernik, K.A. Living labs as a multi-contextual R&D methodology.
In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Concurrent Enterprising: Innovative Products and
Services through Collaborative Networks, ICE 2006, Milan, Italy, 26–28 June 2006.
25. Følstad, A. Living labs for innovation and development of information and communication technology:
A literature review. Electr. J. Virtual Org. Netw. 2008, 10, 99–131.
26. Tan, Y.H.; Bjørn-Andersen, N.; Klein, S.; Rukanova, B. Accelerating Global Supply Chains with It-innovation:
Itaide Tools and Methods; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2011.
27. CGIAR, F.; KM4Dev; UNICEF; UNDP. The Knowledge Sharing Toolkit. Available online: http://www.
kstoolkit.org/The+World+Cafe (accessed on 6 March 2017).
28. WorldCafe. Guide to the World Cafe Method. Available online: http://www.click4it.org/images/a/a5/
World.pdf (accessed on 8 June 2017).
29. Adeoye, I.B.; Odeleye, O.M.O.; Babalola, S.O.; Afolayan, S.O. Economic analysis of tomato losses in Ibadan
metropolis, Oyo State, Nigeria. African J. of Basic Appl. Sci. 2009, 1, 87–92.
30. Kok, M.G.; Dastoum, S.; Groot, J.J.; Plaisier, C.; Dijkxhoorn, Y.; van Wagenberg, C.P.A. White Paper on
Measurement Protocol on Food Loss (Forthcoming); Wageningen Food & Biobased Research: Wageningen,
The Netherlands, 2018.
31. Idah, P.A.; Yisa, M.G.; Chukwu, O.; Morenikeji, O.O. Simulated transport damage study on fresh tomato
(lycopersicon esculentum) fruits. Agric. Eng. Int. CIGR J. 2012, 14, 119–126.
© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
101
sustainability
Article
A Systems Approach to Food Loss and Solutions:
Understanding Practices, Causes, and Indicators
Monika Verma *, Christine Plaisier †, Coen P. A. vanWagenberg † and Thom Achterbosch
Wageningen Economic Research,Wageningen University and Research, 2595 BM Den Haag, The Netherlands;
christine.plaisier@wur.nl (C.P.); coen.vanwagenberg@wur.nl (C.P.A.v.W.); thom.achterbosch@wur.nl (T.A.)
* Correspondence: monika.verma@wur.nl; Tel.: +31-070-335-8277
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received: 30 November 2018; Accepted: 18 January 2019; Published: 22 January 2019
	

Abstract: Reasons behind food loss can be very specific for each product and supply chain stage
but it is also affected by factors independent of the product and stage. This work focuses on such
generic factors and develops a framework to analyze food loss as a systemic outcome. The framework
highlights the interconnected nature of problem across supply chain stages and therefore emphasizes
the need to look at the whole system instead of specific stages, when proposing solutions. Practices
and underlying causes contributing to food loss are identified for each stage of the supply chain using
a literature search. Deductive logic is used to fill the gaps where literature was found to be scarce, and
to derive socio-economic indicators that signal the presence of identified causes. Using this framework,
we propose a non-exhaustive list of 30 socio-economic indicators, which can signal the presence of the
22 practices and 60 causes associated with food loss in supply chains. This list can serve as a starting
list for practitioners and policymakers to build on when analyzing food losses in supply chains in
their region. We evaluate the framework using a field-study of a tomato supply chain in Nigeria, and
conclude that it can be a useful tool to identify practices, causes, and indicators of food loss.
Keywords: systems approach; conceptual framework; food loss practices; food loss causes; food loss
solutions; supply-chain stages; literature; socio-economic indicators; tomato; Nigeria
1. Introduction
Identifying reasons behind food loss is necessary for proposing solutions to combat the problem.
These reasons differ according to the nature of the product and the stage of food supply chain, and are
therefore more likely to be explored for specific combinations of products and supply chain stages.
Looking at narrowly defined stand-alone product-stage combinations can give a comprehensive look
into very specific causes but a broad general understanding of the issue in a macro sense can remain
elusive. This work aims to promote a systemic rather than the stand-alone view of supply chains.
This is done by showing how reasons for food loss are linked across stages of a single or more supply
chains, and therefore proposed solutions should account for such inter-stage linkages. While the need
for such holistic approaches accounting for dynamics of the whole supply chain instead of considering
specific points in isolation is becoming apparent [1], this is precisely the kind of synergy that is often
overlooked by taking a product specific approach to looking at food loss. The purpose of this study
is therefore to develop a conceptual framework identifying root/structural causes of food loss with
emphasis on across stage and across chains interrelations.
Inspiration for our framework comes from three concepts—micro, meso, and macro causes of food
loss—as proposed by the High Level Panel of Experts report (HLPE) [2]. HLPE defines micro-level
causes as actions or inaction of individual actors occurring at the same stage of supply chain where
food is discarded, e.g., consumers not checking their refrigerators regularly to keep stock of what is
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579; doi:10.3390/su11030579 102 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
available and discarding products that go bad. Meso-level causes refer to the way different actors are
organized within or across different stages, e.g., lack of better transport infrastructure hinders how
quickly and efficiently the suppliers and processors/retailers can conduct business. Macro-level causes
are structural in nature, e.g., lack of institutional and legal capacity that could help coordinate actors to
take actions and move towards better outcomes.
The use of terms micro-, meso-, and macro-level are difficult to explain to field actors, therefore we
propose to use more comprehensible concepts of practices, causes, and indicators. In addition, HLPE
does not give a clear link between the micro-, meso-, and macro-level causes. Building on HLPE, this
work attempts to establish a more structured link between the practices, causes, and indicators. We start
by identifying practices across supply chain stages, then identify causes underlying such practices,
and finally we arrive at socio-economic indicators that can signal the presence of the identified causes
in an economy.
While built as progressing from practices to indicators, given the strong links at each stage, this
framework can as easily be used to look in the opposite direction: starting broad and filtering down
to specifics. The information on socio-economic indicators is usually more readily available (from
local governments and international bodies). Such information can be used to identify infrastructure
categories that need more attention. The framework can then be used to list possible problems
(practices and causes) associated with those infrastructural categories.
The benefit of using such a framework comes from being able to identify broad factors across
supply chain stages applicable to most agricultural products. The link between indicators and food
loss at more than a single supply chain stage implies, that addressing the causes associated with these
indicators should, and could yield multi-stage benefits. Also, while important on their own, structural
reasons of food loss can further be responsible for determining the presence and magnitude of loss at
micro-level [2].
For practitioners, the framework emphasizes the need to be aware of the fact that their specific
interventions might not yield the full potential effect because of the interrelations across supply chain
stages and causes. For policy makers looking to make an impact on food loss, the proposed easier
to observe socio-economic indicators can be used as red flags regarding the existence and severity
of food loss in a region. Identifying indicators and seeing how many practices they can influence,
made possible by viewing food loss as a result of the whole system, can help target efforts towards the
practices and causes with links to multiple stages of supply chain. This work covers four supply chain
stages: production and pre-harvest, harvest and initial on-farm handling, transportation and storage,
and processing.
The article is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines the conceptual framework by means of a
stylized example and identifies the components of the framework. Based on the details of Section 2,
a synthesis of identified practices, causes, indicators, and their influence across stages is provided
in Section 3. Section 4 looks at a specific supply chain—tomato supply chain in Nigeria—to assess
whether the field data and observations support or refute the causes, practices, and indicators proposed
under the systems framework approach. Finally, Section 5 gives the discussion and conclusions.
2. Materials and Methods
Section 2.1 lays out the conceptual framework. Section 2.2 identifies the most direct and clear
links between indicators and causes.
2.1. Conceptual Framework: A Systems Approach
Figure 1a shows a stylized graphical representation of the conceptual framework. We list practices
leading to food loss at each of the four above mentioned supply chain stages by asking: “what practices
exist?” in the field, that contributes to food loss. Practices can be seen as actions or inactions on part of
supply-chain participants. The practices are further explored in order to identify underlying causes that
can help explain the existence of these practices by asking: “why do these practices exist?” For example,
103
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
inadequate credit markets can help explain both, lack of proper storage as well as lack of proper
harvesting techniques. Both questions above, are answered relying heavily, but not exclusively, on
findings of the agronomy literature (see Section 2.2). For identifying indicators, given the absence of
literature linking characteristics of supply chain to those of economy, deductive logic is used to see
what kind of socio-economic characteristics of the economy can reflect the existence of the practices
and causes. If they can help explain the existence of causes and practices behind food loss, efforts made
towards improving these indicators should also contribute towards reduction in food loss. Therefore,
the question asked to identify the indicators is: “how to reduce or minimize the loss resulting from these
causes?”, essentially asking what factors explain the existence of these causes and can therefore help
reduce loss resulting from these causes.
Figure 1b represents the complexity of the relationship between practices, causes, and indicators
proposed in Figure 1a. For clarity of depiction, only two stages of the supply chain are shown, though
the concept applies to all stages. The rectangular boxes called stage A and stage B in the figure depict
the different supply chains stages. The red circles represent causes with ties to observed practices. Note
that a single cause can contribute to losses in more than a one stage. For example, the lack of availability
of credit can lead to the use of sub-quality seeds at the production stage, as well as to use of poor
harvest equipment at the harvest and on-farm handling stage. Finally, the existence of causes is linked
to indicators which can be grouped in four broad categories of infrastructure: knowledge, physical,
financial, and institutional. These categories are chosen as most causes of food loss are believed to
result from financial, knowledge (managerial, technical, organizational), institutional, and physical
infrastructure bottlenecks [3]. We define the categories as follows. Knowledge infrastructure includes
actors and process that determine how knowledge is created, shared, and changed/updated. In this
context, knowledge infrastructure covers knowledge institutions, and extension and information
networks. Physical infrastructure includes basic physical structures required for an economy to
function and survive, such as transportation networks, power grid, sewage and waste disposal, etc.
Institutions (both formal and informal), and institutional arrangements influencing rules and processes
regarding how economy operates, form institutional infrastructure. State of the financial sector and its
operations, and ease of credit access for all agents, forms the financial infrastructure.
The stylized representation helps to understand the food loss problem as a systems approach
problem and therefore helps brings forth insights that otherwise escape scrutiny. Below are some
examples of types of insights that can emerge from our stylized representation:
 What kind of infrastructure is relevant for what stage? Different categories of infrastructure play a
primary/substantial role in determining the state of food loss at different stages. For example,
food loss at stage A is affected by causes (1) and (2), which are linked to knowledge, financial and
institutional features of economy. Stage B practices are affected by causes (2), (3), and (4), and
are thereby linked to physical and institutional infrastructure. As only the institutional category
is shared across the two stages, addressing institutional infrastructure issues could help reduce
food loss across both stages.
 Some practices might be easier to target than others In terms of the stylized figure above, reducing
losses resulting from practice A1 calls for working on both knowledge and financial infrastructure
issues. For A2, in addition to the aforementioned, we also need to pay attention to institutional
factors. This increases the complexity and number of factors that an effective solution looking
to reduce food loss at A2, would need to take into account, and it might therefore be harder to
address. Only addressing knowledge and financial issues might not work because of institutional
bottlenecks. As an example, cold storage facilities (physical) built without addressing electric
grid and distribution issues (institutional and physical).
 Tackling certain causes may affect more practices and possibly yield higher reduction in food loss Addressing
cause (1) affects both practices in Stage A and might therefore be more effective in reducing food
loss in Stage A. Note that focusing on cause (1) to address losses in stage A, does not necessarily
mean higher impacts in terms of food loss reduction: the impact also depends on magnitude
104
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
issues, the initial states of food loss and different infrastructures in a region, and other country
specific features.
 Sustainability/acceptance – need to involve all actors Given the entangled nature of the problem and
chains, the implementation success and propagation of any proposed solution hinges highly on
its acceptability for all involved actors.
(a)
(b)
􀀦􀁋􀁋􀀘 􀀾􀁋􀁞􀁞
􀁗􀁚􀀄􀀒􀁤􀀯􀀒􀀜􀁞
􀀘􀄞􀄨􀅝􀅶􀅝􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀍗􀀃
􀀄􀄐􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀆐􀍬􀅝􀅶􀄂􀄐􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀆐􀀃
􀅽􀅶􀀃􀆉􀄂􀆌􀆚􀀃􀅽􀄨􀀃􀆐􀆵􀆉􀆉􀅯􀇇􀍲
􀄐􀅚􀄂􀅝􀅶􀀃􀆉􀄂􀆌􀆚􀅝􀄐􀅝􀆉􀄂􀅶􀆚􀆐
􀁙􀆵􀄞􀆐􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀍗􀀃􀇁􀅚􀄂􀆚
􀆉􀆌􀄂􀄐􀆚􀅝􀄐􀄞􀆐􀀃􀄞􀇆􀅝􀆐􀆚􀍍
􀀒􀀄􀁨􀁞􀀜􀁞
􀀘􀄞􀄨􀅝􀅶􀅝􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀍗􀀃􀁚􀄞􀄂􀆐􀅽􀅶􀆐􀀃
􀄞􀇆􀆉􀅯􀄂􀅝􀅶􀄂􀅝􀅶􀅐􀀃
􀄞􀆐􀅝􀇆􀆚􀄞􀅶􀄐􀄞􀀃􀅽􀄨􀀃
􀅽􀄏􀆐􀄞􀆌􀇀􀄞􀄚􀀃􀆉􀆌􀄂􀄐􀆚􀅝􀄐􀄞􀆐􀍘
􀁙􀆵􀄞􀆐􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀍗􀀃􀇁􀅚􀇇
􀆚􀅚􀄞􀆐􀄞􀀃􀆉􀆌􀄂􀄐􀆚􀅝􀄐􀄞􀆐􀀃
􀄞􀇆􀅝􀆐􀆚􀍍
􀀯􀁅􀀘􀀯􀀒􀀄􀁤􀁋􀁚􀁞
􀀘􀄞􀄨􀅝􀅶􀅝􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀍗􀀃
􀆐􀆚􀆌􀆵􀄐􀆚􀆵􀆌􀄂􀅯􀀃􀄨􀄞􀄂􀆚􀆵􀆌􀄞􀆐􀀃
􀅽􀄨􀀃􀆚􀅚􀄞􀀃􀆐􀆵􀆉􀆉􀅯􀇇􀍲􀄐􀅚􀄂􀅝􀅶􀀃
􀄂􀅶􀄚􀀃􀄞􀄐􀅽􀅶􀅽􀅵􀅝􀄐􀀃
􀆐􀇇􀆐􀆚􀄞􀅵􀀃􀆚􀅚􀄂􀆚􀀃􀄐􀄂􀅶􀀃
􀆐􀆚􀆌􀄞􀅶􀅐􀆚􀅚􀄞􀅶􀍬􀇁􀄞􀄂􀅬􀄞􀅶􀀃
􀆚􀅚􀄞􀀃􀄐􀄂􀆵􀆐􀄞􀆐􀍘
􀁙􀆵􀄞􀆐􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀍗􀀃􀁴􀅚􀄂􀆚􀀃
􀄞􀇆􀆉􀅯􀄂􀅝􀅶􀆐􀀃􀆚􀅚􀄞􀀃
􀄞􀇆􀅝􀆐􀆚􀄞􀅶􀄐􀄞􀀃􀅽􀄨􀀃􀄐􀄂􀆵􀆐􀄞􀆐􀀃
􀄂􀅶􀄚􀀃􀄐􀄂􀅶􀀃􀆚􀅚􀄞􀆌􀄞􀄨􀅽􀆌􀄞􀀃
􀅚􀄞􀅯􀆉􀀃􀆌􀄞􀄚􀆵􀄐􀄞􀀃􀅯􀅽􀆐􀆐􀀃
􀆌􀄞􀆐􀆵􀅯􀆚􀅝􀅶􀅐􀀃􀄨􀆌􀅽􀅵􀀃
􀆚􀅚􀄞􀆐􀄞􀀃􀄐􀄂􀆵􀆐􀄞􀆐􀍍
Figure 1. Stylized figure showing conceptual framework for the proposed systems approach. (a): link
between the practices contributing to food loss, underlying causes, and identifying indicators.
(b): complex nature of relationship between practices, causes, and indicators. A1 and A2 are examples
of two different practices specific to the supply chain’s stage A. The concentric red circles represent
causes of food loss, not necessarily specific to any given stage. The figure depicts four such different
causes. Knowledge, physical, financial, and institutional are the four types of infrastructure categories,
to which the presence of the stage-generic causes can be linked.
105
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
2.2. Operationalizing the Framework: Identifying Practices and Causes, and Proposing Indicators
2.2.1. Production and Pre-Harvest Stage
Production can be compromised in terms of quantity as well as quality even before it is harvested.
While the focus on food loss is often restricted to post-harvest stages of supply chain, pre-harvest and
harvest stages can and do influence the extent of post-harvest loss [4,5]. For example, wheat exposed to
showers at a late stage of maturity is likely to have a shorter storage life irrespective of quality of storage
facilities. Similarly, at least 5–10% of rice crop in Asia is lost annually to rodents [6] even before it is
harvested, amounting to an equivalent of 11 kg/capita; which might become worse with more frequent
outbreaks expected with climate change [7]. Also, if for any reason the product does not conform to
certain standards for size, color, or shape, it might be rejected at a later stage [8]. For example, if a
particular crop of mangoes fails to develop a required bright red hue, it is either rejected or fetches a
much lower price. Note that this rejection can happen much later at the retail stage even though the
cause—failure to develop the desired characteristics—occurred at the production/pre-harvest stage.
This is the stage of supply chain along with harvesting that is often overlooked in analysis of
food loss [9] by economists; however, it is well explored by agronomists and agricultural engineers.
Furthermore, in face of changing climate, we should expect the extent of such losses to rise [10,11] and
therefore the need for attention to this stage.
 Practices contributing to pre-harvest loss
Pre-harvest losses could occur due to the presence or absence of practices ranging from choice of
sub-optimal crop varieties and seeds [12,13] for local conditions; sub-optimal planting schedule [14,15];
to inefficient farm management practices regarding use of soil [16], water [17], nutrient [17,18]; and
pest control [19].
Yet other causes that can explain losses at the production stage but do not have a bearing on
agents’ agricultural practices can be external factors like a bad weather spell [20–22]. While these
losses are counted, the underlying causes are not a part of the food system. However, such causes can
and do often lead to loss-averting behavior by agents, such as planting more to hedge against such
risk of loss. Such causes should therefore be considered because their effect on agent behavior can be
modified by means of policies and coordination, for example, crop insurance [23].
 Causes underlying practices
Reasons that could influence the choice of crop variety and lead to planting of varieties unsuitable
for local conditions could be many, such as lack of adequate information [24] and unavailability of the
right seed varieties [25–27], either physically or economically.
Suboptimal farm management practices are also often seen as a result of lack of adequate
information [28,29], unavailability of sufficient credit [26] to make changes towards better practices.
The importance of such information in making critical and sustainable farming decisions is well
understood in agronomy [30]. The scale of operation [25] and absence of clear regulations regarding
farm management [27] can also influence how much time and effort a farmer spends on such activities.
Unforeseen consequences of government policies is another possible cause that can promote bad
farm management practices (for example, using too much fertilizer) or the use of varieties unsuitable
for local conditions. For example, providing free electricity for irrigation in India has promoted paddy
cultivation supported by injudicious ground-water pumping in parts of the country, which would
normally not grow the crop in absence of such a policy [31]. This is an example where the higher
price for locally unsuitable variety along with government support for irrigation makes the adoption
of the crop possible. Such crops are more susceptible to loss in event of failure/delay of the policy
support they get. It is therefore important to pay attention to unintended consequence of a government
support programs.
 Indicators of causes of production and pre-harvest loss
Lack of adequate information and physical unavailability of varieties suitable to local conditions
can arise from absence of regional agricultural research institutes and extension services or lack of their
106
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
active participation in extension work. These, in turn, can result from neglecting agricultural sector
and focusing more on industry in an attempt to grow faster. This is often the case with underdeveloped
and developing economies.
Lack of economic access to suitable crop varieties could be a manifestation of lack of credit
availability and immature state of financial infrastructure. The same two reasons explain equally well
the use of suboptimal farm management practices. The small scale of operation (as is often the case
in developing world) in absence of co-operatives and associations could result in a lack of incentives
for investing in better farm practices. Such lack of organized efforts is also reflected in the inability of
farmers to negotiate better contracts and prices for their produce, leading them to alternative hedging
practices like planting more.
The above-mentioned indicators are often found to be poorly performing in developing countries,
which are also the regions believed to be suffering more from problem of food loss in comparison to
the developed world, which usually performs better on these indicators.
2.2.2. Harvest and Initial On-Farm Handling Stage
The next important stage in the food supply chain is harvesting including on farm sorting,
threshing, and initial handling, described broadly as the “agricultural production” category in
Gustavsson et al. [32]. Harvesting losses cause loss of output for not only current crops but may
also have implications for quality and therefore buyers’ acceptability of future crops, as suggested in
Gulden et al. [33]. In terms of products, roots and tubers, and fruits and vegetables seem to be more
susceptible to on farm losses than crops like cereals and oil seeds [32].
Unlike production losses (Section 2.2.1), cutting and threshing losses (not including losses from
other initial handling processes like drying) seem not to significantly differ across traditional and
mechanized supply chains (Figure 1, [34]). This seems to indicate that large-scale mechanization
(as seen in agriculture in developed world) is not necessarily better when it comes to preventing
harvesting losses.
 Practices contributing to harvest loss
Actions at harvest stage can broadly be grouped into poor timing of harvest [35,36], poor methods
and equipment choice for harvesting and initial handling [37], and inability to harvest or decision not
to harvest the crop [38].
The time of harvest can affect the loss of agricultural produce in multiple ways. Apart from
determining yield and quality of produce [39], harvest time also determines the moisture content of
crop [40] and thereby its susceptibility to infestation. Similarly, maturity at the time of harvest can
affect the extent of mold, insect, and aflatoxin contamination for grains [41,42]. Using contaminated
grains as feed is also not feasible as it can lead to contaminated animal products [43]. Sometimes
harvesting is delayed because the crop is left to dry in a field before it is harvested and often for
longer than the recommended duration [41,44]. The timing of harvest of horticultural crops determines
levels of ethylene, which affects its post-harvest shelf life (Chapter 2, [45]). Not only the maturity of
horticultural products, but even the time of day chosen for harvest, can determine their post-harvest
chemistry, and handling needs and in absence of the proper handling the likelihood of spoilage [4].
Timing, harvest method, and initial handling procedures can all affect the nutrient content
(quality loss) of horticulture crops [46]. Improper harvest methods and initial handling can result
in cuts, bruising, and surface abrasion in roots, tubers, fruits, and vegetables while harvesting
leading to loss of water and nutrients (Chapter 2, [45]). Some examples of such practices are: use of
mechanical combine harvester without specialized headers [47], particularly when crop is fallen or
lodged; losses like spillage and heat injuries associated with mechanical harvesting [48]; failing to sort
infected crop during harvesting often leading to contamination spreading to good harvest [49–51];
contamination during harvesting particularly from use of unhygienic equipment and unhygienic
handling of dairy and slaughtered animals [52,53], often resulting in entire batches being discarded.
Similarly, multiple or rough handling of horticultural produce can result in avoidable loss during
107
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
harvest and/or transportation [48]. Note that while such factors are applied to both mechanical and
manual harvesting, they are more relevant for mechanical ones as proper management of procedures
is required (Chapter 2, [45]).
Inability to harvest or the decision to leave crops in field also contribute to harvest loss. Data from
the U.S. shows that, on average, about 7% of all planted crops are not harvested, the same figure for
fruits and vegetables stand at 6%, and the numbers can be as high as 50% for some particularly bad
years [8]. Moreover, one crop not harvested and left on field can provide food to rodent populations
that can harm other standing crops [6].
 Causes underlying practices
The reasons for sub-optimal harvest timing could be many: economic hardship [54] and need
of cash [55], lack of adequate infrastructure and transport [55,56] (Chapter 13) for timely delivery
of product to markets contributing to early harvest, labor shortage [57,58] contributing to late or no
harvest, lack of information on best practices [59], and credit constraints (can delay or push forward
the time of harvest).
Mechanical inefficiency [60], often in combination with plant spacing, can also contribute to some
amount of harvest lost. According to some estimates the harvest loss should be about 2–4% but is
often as high as 10% or more (Figure 2, [2]), even in developed countries.
􀏮􀏮
􀏰 􀏱
􀏭􀏬
􀏯
􀏲􀏬
􀏭􀏮 􀏭􀏯
􀏮􀏵
􀏲
􀏯􀏬
􀏲
􀏭􀏭
􀏲 􀏳
􀏬
􀏭􀏬
􀏮􀏬
􀏯􀏬
􀏰􀏬
􀏱􀏬
􀏲􀏬
􀏳􀏬
􀀜􀅶􀆚􀅝􀆌􀄞􀀃􀆐􀆵􀆉􀆉􀅯􀇇
􀄐􀅚􀄂􀅝􀅶
􀁗􀆌􀅽􀄚􀆵􀄐􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀀃􀄂􀅶􀄚
􀆉􀆌􀄞􀍲􀅚􀄂􀆌􀇀􀄞􀆐􀆚
􀀬􀄂􀆌􀇀􀄞􀆐􀆚􀀃􀄂􀅶􀄚􀀃􀅝􀅶􀅝􀆚􀅝􀄂􀅯
􀅽􀅶􀍲􀄨􀄂􀆌􀅵􀀃􀅚􀄂􀅶􀄚􀅯􀅝􀅶􀅐
􀁤􀆌􀄂􀅶􀆐􀆉􀅽􀆌􀆚􀀃􀄂􀅶􀄚
􀆐􀆚􀅽􀆌􀄂􀅐􀄞
􀁗􀆌􀅽􀄐􀄞􀆐􀆐􀅝􀅶􀅐
􀁗􀆌􀄂􀄐􀆚􀅝􀄐􀄞􀆐􀍕􀀃􀄐􀄂􀆵􀆐􀄞􀆐􀍕􀀃􀄂􀅶􀄚􀀃􀅝􀅶􀄚􀅝􀄐􀄂􀆚􀅽􀆌􀆐􀀃􀅽􀄨􀀃􀄨􀅽􀅽􀄚􀀃􀅯􀅽􀆐􀆐􀍗􀀃􀀒􀅽􀆵􀅶􀆚􀀃􀄂􀄐􀆌􀅽􀆐􀆐􀀃
􀆐􀆵􀆉􀆉􀅯􀇇􀀃􀄐􀅚􀄂􀅝􀅶􀀃􀆐􀆚􀄂􀅐􀄞􀆐
􀁗􀆌􀄂􀄐􀆚􀅝􀄐􀄞􀆐 􀀒􀄂􀆵􀆐􀄞􀆐 􀀯􀅶􀄚􀅝􀄐􀄂􀆚􀅽􀆌􀆐
Figure 2. Practices, causes, and indicators’ count by supply-chain stage.
Often times all or part of horticulture crop is not harvested or not sent forward into the supply
chain owing to failed aesthetic standards [61], bad weather [62] or a plunge in market price for
crop [63,64].
 Indicators of causes of harvest and initial on-farm handling loss
From the analysis so far in Sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2, it can be argued that within on-farm losses that
are often clumped together in food loss analysis (Figure 2, [55]), the real difference between developed
and developing regions comes not so much from harvesting losses but from initial handling and
production practices. This seems to suggest that prevalence of traditional (less mechanized) harvesting
cannot be taken as an indicator for the presence of large-scale harvesting loss.
Lack of means for dealing with economic hardship and need for cash leading to premature
harvesting would be reflected in the absence of financial support system for farmers, which can
in turn be measured by the absence of formal (agricultural development banks) and/or informal
(co-operatives) channels of credit. Similarly, harvesting early to reach markets in time can be caught by
measuring distance of markets from farms and the condition and extent of transport network. The need
108
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
to reach distant markets could indicate a lack of local markets but also a shift towards a supermarket
model of produce distribution. Agricultural labor shortage is again often a result of urbanization and
migration of population towards urban areas. Early harvest due to lack of information on the best
time to harvest is often due to lack of education and extension services. For example, education of
farmer—a measure of ability of farmer to either already have the necessary information or be able to
seek it—was the only variable that was found to be significant at 1% level for reducing losses for both
wheat and rice in India in 2004 [65].
A decision not to harvest because of produce lacking in appearance can indicate a lack of
alternative channels of disposal for fresh produce than the established supermarket chains, a lack of
consumer awareness, or a lack of processing facilities to sell produce as canned or preserved. If crop is
left on farm and not harvested because the farm price cannot cover production costs, it can indicate a
lack of farm collectives or support programs and of storage and processing facilities.
2.2.3. Transport and Storage Stage
Transport and storage are important features of a modern food supply chain. Urbanization
and the associated “supermarket revolution” [66] leads to changing nature of the food supply chain.
This often results in increased distance and time between production and consumption [67], thereby
increasing the demand and importance of transport and storage in food supply chain [68]. However,
the improvements in efficiency come with a delay and products spend longer time in conditions not
quite suitable for maintaining quality and/or quantity. Aulakh et al. [69] claim the loss during storage
to be the highest in the supply chain, and as much as 50% to 60% of cereals stored can be lost due to
technical inefficiencies [70]. Given the lack of clear chronological order between transport and storage,
the two are combined for the purpose of this analysis.
In regions of world where transport and storage facilities are better, such losses are rare and
come from equipment malfunctioning. Not surprisingly, the extent of losses are higher for developing
regions of the world and, across products, losses are higher for fruits and vegetables owing to their
highly perishable nature [32].
 Practices contributing to transport and storage loss
Spoilage can occur during transportation itself owing to lack of temperature control, but also
because of rough and multiple handling during loading and off-loading [4,71], and lack of proper
storage [72] at the docks. Other factors that contribute to transport losses are theft [73], spillage,
stress or heat injuries [45,71,74] in fresh produce, as well as in livestock due to improper securing
and packaging of cargo and longer time spent in transit [71]. As much as 16% of expected income
from cattle is lost in Ghana and 45% of cattle in Ethiopia is affected during transport [2]. Loss of
fresh produce is estimated to be between 30–50% in developing countries in the transport and storage
stages [75].
Sometimes the produce is stored on-farm instead of being transported to market or is transported
to an off-farm storage facility instead of a market. Grains stored at home openly or in traditional
sacks [76,77]; tubers not sorted, cured, and treated before storage [78,79]; ineffective fumigation of
grain silos [80,81]; and not using cold storage for horticultural crops all result in avoidable storage
losses [75,82]. Traditional storage methods and equipment usually do not provide sufficient protection
against temperature fluctuations and humidity. Better practices and technologies can reduce storage
losses by almost 98% of those seen with traditional methods [70], irrespective of length of storage
period. For example, Purdue improved crop storage (PICS) has been shown to reduce grain damage
in terms of weight loss due to insects from over 40% to under 1% [83]. Unsanitary and unhygienic
handling [22] during storage and transportation further adds to these losses.
Despite the use of the best storage facilities and practices, the losses can be considerable depending
on product quality at time of harvest. This again points to the importance of link between product loss
across stages and the need to tackle the problem in a system-wide context.
 Causes underlying practices
109
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
One reason behind transport losses is the high cost of transportation. Transport costs in Africa can
be five times as high as those in Asia [84]. High transport costs render decent transport facilities outside
the reach of small to medium scale farms [8], often making temperature-controlled transportation
inaccessible to such farms. Cheaper but unreliable transport alternatives like donkeys, bicycles, or bad
quality vehicles often result in delays in addition to those caused by bad road infrastructure and road
blocks [82]. Both contribute toward a loss of quantity and quality. Transport losses are compounded
because of improper cargo handling (unhygienic handling, piling, sitting on produce, etc.) often due
to lack of knowledge about best practices [82]. Inefficient logistic planning further complicates matters
(Chapter 2, [71]). Delays in reaching off-farm destinations could be caused not only for domestic
produce but also for exported and imported products at the port of entry or exit. The important role
that a cheaper and faster transport plays in spurring international trade is well-established [85].
Most storage loss, whether because of insects, pests, rodents, or temperature and moisture, can be
attributed to poor storage conditions or equipment. For farmers in developing countries, cold storage
for fresh produce is often not available or is a very expensive technology [82]. Given the fact that most
such countries are geographically concentrated in tropical zones [75], high and variable temperatures
accelerate the spoilage. Even when cold storage is available, mixing and piling together all different
products at different stages of maturity results in losses [82] that can be easily avoided if this knowledge
is to be made available to farmers. Furthermore, many developing countries experience an erratic,
inconsistent power supply which renders any existing cold storage facilities ineffective [86–88]. While
grains and tubers do not require cold storage, traditional storage methods often result in high losses
mostly on account of lack of knowledge on best practices [22] such as drying and packaging.
 Indicators of causes of transport and storage loss
Only purchasing the best equipment available is often not enough to reduce losses seen at
the storage and transport for a host of factors as pointed out by [75]; using forklift/pallet trucks
to avoid multiple handling also requires better surfaces for these machines to operate on, which
cannot be achieved without planning infrastructural investments. Similarly, building cold storage
without ensuring a regular and reliable power supply does not help. Therefore, developing low-cost
technologies suited to local conditions [82] while working towards improving the local conditions
should be a preferred approach. This requires promoting local research and extension efforts and
building on the existing indigenous knowledge infrastructure alongside physical infrastructure. Both
are severely lacking in the developing world.
Also, a lack of credit for investment and general apathy to agriculture can be seen in the inadequate
(less than 5% of agricultural research funds worldwide) investment funds devoted to combat such
losses (Chapter 1, [45]). Individual farmers do not have enough resources to make such investments
on their own, while the absence of cooperatives rules out any collective organized effort.
Lack of credit, state of physical and knowledge infrastructure, and absence of collectives in
presence of large share of small-scale farms are therefore good telltale signs of high transport and
storage loss.
2.2.4. Processing
Processing can increase the shelf life of products by transforming it into canned and preserved
varieties. In this way, this processing can be seen as one form of storage. In developing countries,
edible food often ends up being lost due to the absence of processing facilities.
Food surplus in periods of excess supply or food that is slightly bruised/aesthetically unappealing
can be processed for preservation and consumption at a later time.
An undesirable result of processing is often found to be a loss of vitamins and trace minerals [89],
indicating that processing should not be a primary focus as a solution. Fortification can address this
criticism but places a double burden on small-scale, capital-poor agents. Also, while processing serves
the increasing demand for convenience food (pre-cut and ready to use produce), minimally processed
produce does not last as long as intact produce (Chapter 2, [71]). This results in increased food waste at
110
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
retail and consumer level. It therefore seems, that processing avoids food loss but adds to food waste
and the reduction in food loss often comes at price of increased plastic/packaging waste [2].
 Practices contributing to processing loss
Processing facilities in developing countries are mostly traditional for example fermentation,
pickling (Chapter 3, [71]) and can often only handle small volumes [32]. Also, the produce preserved
in traditional methods would often have limited local demand due to tastes and often fails to comply
with food safety standards and other requirements such as labelling [87]. In addition, unsanitary
and unhygienic handling of produce and dairy during the process can lead to easily avoidable
losses [52,53,87].
In the developed world, defects in packaging, such as wrong size, shape, and appearance make
certain batches of processed product redundant [75]. Similarly, increased focus on achieving conformity
results in excessive trimming of otherwise edible product. European Commission [90] estimated the
processing sector in EU to be the second highest waste generator (19%) in 2012 after consumers (53%).
Some estimates indicate that only 50% of the potato at the processing stage comes out in the form of a
final output [91].
 Causes underlying practices
As indicated in the previous section, losses in developing countries are often attributable to absent,
inadequate, or limited capacity processing facilities [2]. The small scale of operation of individual
farmers and the absence of coordinated collectives makes processing costs for individual farmers too
high [87]. Processing facilities also requires investments in technical know-how capacity beyond the
reach of small and oftentimes uneducated farmers. Also, in most developing countries, governments
usually emphasize increased agricultural production rather than integrated efforts towards production
and post-harvest management (Chapter 1, [71]).
The reasons for a high processing loss in the developed world on the other hand seems more
to do with consumer attitudes towards acceptability [92] than technical or institutional limitations
affecting the processing sector. Technical malfunctioning [2] can also result in processing loss.
 Indicators of causes of processing loss
Capacity limits or non-existence of processing facilities, absence of organized community efforts,
along with small scale farm operations and biased agricultural policy in favor of increased production
are some indicators that can indicate the possible presence of big processing loss.
In the face of given consumer attitudes, absence of food-collectives, and possibility of legal
obligation on food donations by processors can be indicative of the presence of processing losses.
While this section identifies only the most direct and clear links, a full matrix of the links, both
direct and apparent, is available to interested readers upon request from the authors.
3. Results
This section builds on Section 2.2. and provides the information in tabular and graphical form.
We present only the most direct and clear links. A full matrix of links is available upon request from
the authors.
Figure 3 shows the number of indicators identified for the entire supply chain and for each of the
individual four stages. In total, there are 30 indicators: 6 each relevant for production and pre-harvest,
and transport and storage stages, 7 for processing stage, and 11 for harvest and initial on-farm handling
stage. One important insight emerging from Figure 3 is that there is overemphasis on technological
(knowledge and physical facilities) and financial bottlenecks in proposing solutions against food loss,
but the often overlooked institutional infrastructure seems just as important. Collective efforts can
yield benefits for small farmers as well as for the entire supply chain [93,94].
111
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
􀏱􀎎
􀏮
􀏭 􀏭 􀏭
􀏭􀏱
􀏮
􀏲
􀏮
􀏱
􀏲
􀏮 􀏮
􀏭 􀏭
􀏱􀎎
􀏬
􀏮 􀏮
􀏭
􀏬
􀏮
􀏰
􀏲
􀏴
􀏭􀏬
􀏭􀏮
􀏭􀏰
􀏭􀏲
􀀜􀅶􀆚􀅝􀆌􀄞􀀃􀆐􀆵􀆉􀆉􀅯􀇇
􀄐􀅚􀄂􀅝􀅶
􀁗􀆌􀅽􀄚􀆵􀄐􀆚􀅝􀅽􀅶􀀃􀄂􀅶􀄚
􀆉􀆌􀄞􀍲􀅚􀄂􀆌􀇀􀄞􀆐􀆚
􀀬􀄂􀆌􀇀􀄞􀆐􀆚􀀃􀄂􀅶􀄚􀀃􀅝􀅶􀅝􀆚􀅝􀄂􀅯
􀅽􀅶􀍲􀄨􀄂􀆌􀅵􀀃􀅚􀄂􀅶􀄚􀅯􀅝􀅶􀅐
􀁤􀆌􀄂􀅶􀆐􀆉􀅽􀆌􀆚􀀃􀄂􀅶􀄚
􀁞􀆚􀅽􀆌􀄂􀅐􀄞
􀁗􀆌􀅽􀄐􀄞􀆐􀆐􀅝􀅶􀅐
􀀯􀅶􀄚􀅝􀄐􀄂􀆚􀅽􀆌􀀃􀄐􀄂􀆚􀄞􀅐􀅽􀆌􀇇􀍗􀀃􀀒􀅽􀆵􀅶􀆚􀀃􀄏􀇇􀀃􀆐􀆵􀆉􀆉􀅯􀇇􀀃􀄐􀅚􀄂􀅝􀅶􀀃􀆐􀆚􀄂􀅐􀄞
􀀦􀀯 􀀯􀀯 􀀼􀀯 􀁗􀀯
Figure 3. Indicator count by category and supply-chain stage. FI: financial infrastructure; II:
institutional infrastructure; KI: Knowledge infrastructure; PI: physical infrastructure. (*)FI and PI
categories have one common indicator counted in both categories.
A list of the 30 indicators identified across the four stages is presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Infrastructural indicators proposed to assess the state of food loss in a region.
Supply-chain Stage 1 Proposed Indicator Infrastructure Category of
Proposed Indicator 2
PH
Lack of general credit availability FI
Immature state of general financial infrastructure FI
Ag policy: neglecting agricultural and focusing more on
industry/Injudicious ag support II
Absence of co-operatives and farmer associations II
Absence of regional agricultural research institutes and extension
services KI
Lack of active participation of regional agricultural research
institutes in extension work KI
HH
Absence of financial support system for farmers FI
Distance of markets/seed centers from farms II
Lack of local markets to sell product II
Supermarket model of produce distribution II
Urbanization and migration of population II
Lack of alternative demand channels of disposal of produce
(processing, storage, others) II
Lack of farm collectives or support programs II
Lack of education and extension services KI
Lack of consumer awareness KI
Transport network PI
Lack of processing and storage facilities PI
TS
Lack of credit for investment FI
General apathy to agriculture II
Absence of cooperatives II
Lack of research and extension efforts KI
Lack of technologies/facilities suited to local conditions PI
Lack of infrastructural investments PI
P
Absence of organized community efforts II
Small-scale or non-diversified farm operations II
Biased agricultural policy in favor of increased production II
Absence of food-collectives II
Legal obligation on food donations II
Consumer attitudes KI
Capacity limits or non-existence of processing facilities PI/FI
1 PH: production and pre-harvest; HH: harvest and initial on-farm handling; TS: transport and storage; P: processing.
2 FI: financial infrastructure; II: institutional infrastructure; KI: knowledge infrastructure; PI: physical infrastructure.
112
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
Some of the proposed indicators are specific to farming and agriculture, while others reflect the
state of the wider economy. Some are connected to more than one stage (column 1, Table 1), and
therefore seem to reappear in the list with slight differences. For example, community/co-operative
efforts appear in all four stages, but it is considered a different indicator as community effort can take
the form of different practices across different stages. Finally, the categorical classification (FI: financial
infrastructure; II: institutional infrastructure; KI: knowledge infrastructure; PI: physical infrastructure)
is also reported in column 3.
As the performance of a region on each indicator is seen as a signal regarding presence and
severity of the food loss problem, the better the performance of a region in all categories, the less severe
food loss is likely to be an issue for that region.
Figure 2 provides similar information for the practices and causes, as Figure 3 does for indicators.
In all, there are 22 broad practice groups, 60 causes underlying the existence of such practices, and 30
indicators which can reflect the presence of these practices and causes in the supply chain.
Table 2 provides a list of all practices and causes by each stage. Existence of more causes (60) than
practices further iterates the fact that each practice can be liked to multiple causes, and addressing a
single cause might not yield desired reduction in food loss attributable to that practice. With multiple
practices responsible for food loss, the complexity further increases.
113
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
Table 2. Practices and causes identified in literature by each supply chain stage.
Supply Chain Stage Practices Causes
Production and pre-harvest
Use of sub-optimal crop varieties and seeds Lack of information on varieties, physical unavailability of right seeds and varieties, economic
unavailability of right seeds and varieties, wrong market(price) signals
Sub-optimal planting schedule Lack of information about planting; multiple or early planting due to economic hardship
Inefficient farm management Lack of information about farm management, credit unavailability, scale of farm operation, absence of
clear farm management regulations
External factors Bad weather (often leading to planting more to hedge), bad general economic conditions (often leading
to planting more to hedge)
Harvest and initial on-farm
handling
Poor timing of harvest Economic hardship and need for cash, inadequate infrastructure and transport to ensure timely
delivery, labor shortage, lack of information about harvesting
Poor harvest methods and equipment Lack of information about harvesting, mechanical inefficiency, credit unavailability
Poor on-farm initial handling, during and
post-harvest Lack of information
Inability to harvest Labor shortage; bad weather
Decision to not harvest Low market price, aesthetic product standard requirements, bad weather
Transport and storage
Lack of temperature control Tropical climate, expensive storage technologies, erratic and unreliable power supply
Rough and multiple handling Lack of knowledge about best practices, inefficient logistic planning, unreliable transport alternatives
Improper storage at docks Expensive storage technologies, tropical climate, lack of knowledge about best practices
Theft and spillage Unreliable transport alternatives; inadequate road and rail infrastructure, road blocks; lack of
knowledge about best practices; inefficient logistic planning
Stress and heat injuries
Unreliable transport alternatives; inadequate road and rail infrastructure, road blocks; lack of
knowledge about best practices; inefficient logistic planning; tropical climate; erratic and unreliable
power supply
Long transit time Inadequate road and rail infrastructure, road blocks; unreliable transport alternatives; inefficient
logistic planning
Storing unsorted, untreated, uncured crop Lack of knowledge about best practices
Insanitary and unhygienic storing Lack of knowledge about best practices
Ineffective fumigation Lack of knowledge about best practices, lack of technical capacity and availability of treatment
Ineffective storage sacks/silos Tropical climate, expensive storage technologies, lack of knowledge about best practices
Processing
Traditional processing Lack of or limited processing facilities, high costs of modern processing equipment
Unsanitary and unhygienic handling Lack of information on best practices, lack of government efforts to improve postharvest practices
Discards due to product aesthetic standards Consumer attitudes towards product acceptability, technical malfunctioning
114
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
4. Framework Assessment: Comparison with Tomato Supply Chains in Nigeria
Does the framework proposed in Section 2 help explain practices and causes seen in tomato
supply chain in Nigeria? Data on tomato supply chain in Nigeria is gathered from two sources:
a) responses of supply chain participants [95], and b) a non-exhaustive literature search on tomato
losses in Nigeria. The subsections list the practices and causes of losses identified by literature and by
field workshops for each stage.
4.1. Practices, Causes, and Indicators Identified in Literature
4.1.1. Production and Pre-Harvest
Tomatoes in Nigeria are grown outside and farmers do not control many variables that affect the
quantity and quality of harvest, such as temperature, relative humidity, solar radiation and growing
media [96], and soil moisture and presence of pathogens [97]. Farmers generally lack access to
improved varieties and quality seeds [98].
Reliance on rainwater because of lack of proper irrigation [99] causes tomato production to be
concentrated in the wet season. This causes seasonal production peak and low prices [99]. Heavy
rainfall in wet season promotes growth of fungi [100,101], causing leaf diseases, such as wilt [102],
blight [103], and defoliation and yellowing [100] of field crop, but also losses at later stages [101].
Recommended pesticides are not used because of high costs and lack of the necessary expertise to
ensure their proper application [104]. Credit facilities needed to address such problems are often not
available to farmers [101].
4.1.2. Harvest and Initial On-Farm Handling
Tomatoes are harvested half or fully ripe [105] including those intended for distant markets.
Sometimes harvesting is done during the hotter moments of the day, which can result in heat stress to
tomatoes [105]. Farmers use woven palm leaf collection baskets with hard and sharp edges for harvest
collection and load these as fully as possible [99]. Baskets and tomatoes are not disinfected [99], and
rotten fruits are mixed with healthy ones in baskets and in storage facilities, causing rapid spread
of pathogens [99,106]. Most farmers store harvested tomatoes under tree shade without any further
protection [99,105]. Without adequate storage facilities, pathogens can develop quickly [98]. Adequate
storage facilities and post-harvest technologies are not used because farmers do not know about these
options, have inadequate technological knowledge, have insufficient contact with extension workers,
or the technologies are not available [98].
4.1.3. Transport and Storage
Cold storage facilities are often inadequate due to lack of electricity supply for farmers [107].
Farmers do not use appropriate post-harvest crop handling techniques, appropriate storage facilities
are too expensive or not available, appropriate transport modes are not available, road conditions are
bad, and market information and access are insufficient [106]. Fungicides are often too expensive to
use during on-farm storage even if they were available [108], and farmers do not have access to credit
facilities [101].
The raffia baskets are often used to move and store tomatoes without being disinfected between
batches. A fungal spore left by one batch can easily infect subsequent batches [101]. Appropriate
vehicles are often not available [98] and rail system cannot be used due to unusual delays [101]. Due to
lacking adequate storage facilities at the farm [106], farmers need to move tomatoes quickly after
harvest; therefore, all kinds of vehicles are used for transporting tomatoes to markets, many of them
old and unfit [101]. Ropes used to secure baskets to such vehicles result in excessive local pressure and
damage to tomatoes [109]. During transportation when baskets are overfilled or transporters use only
leaves to separate the baskets [101], tomatoes are crushed [109]. In addition, flexible baskets forced into
115
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
inadequate spaces in a vehicle, in conjunction with vibrations and impacts due to bad road surfaces,
result in the compression and damage of the tomatoes [98,109].
Knowledge on the correct handling, storing, and transporting of tomatoes is lacking due to
insufficient assistance and extension services, prevalence and perseverance of existing suboptimal
practices, and a lack of interest from policy-makers [109]. Available training and research in the
agricultural sector is inadequate [101]. Packaging containers such as plastic crates are not readily
available, not available in sizes similar to the familiar raffia baskets, and are too expensive [110].
Additionally, many tomato fields are remote and are either not connected by good roads or the roads
are in deplorable condition [99].
4.1.4. Processing
Sun-drying being simple and cheap is often used as a preservation technique though it reduces
the ascorbic acid in tomatoes by almost 70% [101]. Knowledge on correct preservation and processing
is lacking, because available training and research in the agricultural sector is inadequate [101].
4.2. Field Observations on Practices and Causes
Supply chain participants (farmers, transporters, traders, and retailers) in the tomato supply chain
in Nigeria were gathered in workshops with the aim to identify practices and causes for postharvest
losses in their supply chain [95]. This section summarizes the results of these workshops.
4.2.1. Production and Pre-Harvest
Workshop participants identified seed quality, pest and disease occurrence, and weather
fluctuations as main reasons for on-farm loss of tomatoes. Few farmers have irrigation facilities.
The participants also reported high seasonality of tomato production leading to oversupply, low prices,
and high losses in the peak season.
Farmers confirmed that high-quality seeds are either not available or not accessible due to lack of
access to credit facilities. Lack of knowledge required for pest and disease control and unavailability of
quality pesticide were also mentioned. The general lack of knowledge on good agricultural practices,
both at farmer and extension worker level, was evident. Absence of farm records made the use of farm
data for decision making and planning at the farm impossible. There is a general lack of producer
cooperatives or collective action. Periods of over- and under-supply also usually result in produce
not being harvested as costs often exceeding revenue. According to all participants, the focus of
government policies is on other sectors (i.e., oil). No investments are made in agricultural research,
nor in development and adoption of good agricultural practices.
4.2.2. Harvest and Initial On-Farm Handling
Workshop participants indicated that tomatoes are harvested at a late stage of maturity because
the price is often set at the farm gate and the more mature the tomatoes the higher the price the farmer
receives. In addition, participants mentioned a shortage of labor and that the available labor is often
unskilled and unaware of proper harvesting techniques. Mechanization is not practical, as it requires
high investments, which farmers cannot afford.
Use of raffia baskets for the tomato collection is widespread. According to the farmers, using
plastic crates for tomatoes would not be possible because of the large scale of production would require
a huge number of crates and it was unclear who should own the crates. They reported that investment
needed towards introducing the plastic crates would be too high to bear for a single actor. The long
geographic spread of the chain also poses a challenge of returning empty crates to their owners.
Beneath these practices is a lack of awareness and knowledge on good harvesting and handling
techniques and on the subsequent consequences for the tomato quality. Besides, the lack of access to
credit facilities hampers investments in better materials and equipment.
116
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
4.2.3. Transport and Storage
All participants perceived transportation as a very serious cause of tomato loss. In addition,
participants mentioned that the infrastructure is very poor, and many official and unofficial road
controls lead to huge delays.
Transport fees are paid for each basket transported. The per basket mode of payment provides
incentive for the transporters to take as many baskets as possible in a single trip. Given the flexibility
of traditional raffia baskets this leads to tomato loss during transportation. Loading and off-loading is
done in a very poor way and without much care. Furthermore, transporters are not held accountable
for the condition and delivery time of tomatoes at their destination. This leaves no incentive for
transporters to change the manner of their operations.
Most existing markets are without any shed, equipment, hygiene, or covering facilities for storing
produce. For underlying causes, the participants point at general lack of knowledge on proper
handling, lack of investments in improving the infrastructure, corruption and lack of security and
control, and actors not being held accountable.
4.2.4. Processing
According to workshop participants, tomatoes are hardly ever processed to make tomato paste.
There are a few companies willing to work with farmers producing tomatoes in open fields instead of
green houses. Lack of cooperatives and collective action and the absence of crop scheduling hampers
a stable supply of tomatoes to potential processing companies. Besides, there are doubts about the
quality of tomatoes as a result of the low level of knowledge and application of good agricultural
practices. For the drying practices, farmers lack the appropriate facilities and equipment as well as the
knowledge and awareness on the appropriate drying techniques and hygiene practices. Participants
also perceived the business environment to be marked by corruption and lack of transparency and
suspected that it results in lack of interest from external investors to establish processing facilities in
the country.
As can be seen, the conceptual framework lists many of the factors identified using field
observations and associated literature of a specific case study without having to dig deeper into
the specific case in question.
5. Discussion and Conclusions
The current work provides a conceptual framework to identify macro/structural factors
responsible for food loss at various supply chain stages. According to the findings, poor institutional
infrastructure, appears to be as prevalent a reason behind food loss as bad physical and financial
infrastructures. This suggests that while technology-based solutions to food loss are important, the
role of institutions deserves more attention. The framework further brings to the fore, the complex
nature of the inter-connected reasons underlying food loss in supply chains, and emphasizes the need
to see food loss as a systemic outcome.
The main advantages of this approach are:
• It can quickly help to identify problem areas in the supply-chain without the need to gather data
on the whole supply chain of a product in any region. Once identified, the points of possible
intervention should be explored further to devise the right solution.
• This manner of looking for solutions using a systems view lowers the risk of ineffective solutions
and unintended negative consequences of proposed intervention.
• While food loss is hard to measure, data on indicators listed above are more easily available and
comparable across regions.
• A solution towards bettering a given indicator affects not one but multiple causes associated
with that indicator whether in the same or in different stages of the supply-chain; therefore, this
approach can be used to identify solutions with most potential. Similarly, a given cause can be
117
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
perpetuated due to bad performance on multiple indicators. Therefore, a single intervention
aiming a single indicator/category would often fail to achieve its full potential in the presence of
other bottlenecks in the system.
This work is not a substitute for quantifying the impact of various causes on extent of food loss.
While an attempt is made to be thorough with the posed framework, the list of possible practices,
causes, and indicators should not be treated as exhaustive or complete but as a starting base to build on.
Also, while we could identify that Nigerian tomato supply chain seems to comply with the proposed
framework, it should be tested for more products and regions. Furthermore, while the indicators are
suggested because they are expected to be correlated to food losses, this remains to be confirmed.
With limited existing work on evaluating the impact of improving infrastructure on food loss and
waste [111], as a next step, more effort should be made to estimate the magnitude of effect on food loss
from efforts towards improvement in these indicators.
We conclude that our framework can be a useful tool to identify socio-economic indicators that
can signal the presence of food loss in supply chain stages. Furthermore, it can be used for linking
practices in a given supply chain stage with their underlying causes that appear across multiple supply
chain stages.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization and methodology, M.V.; validation, C.P. and C.P.A.v.W.; formal analysis,
M.V., C.P., and C.P.A.v.W.; writing, M.V., C.P., C.P.A.v.W.; visualization, M.V., C.P.; project administration, M.V.
and T.A.; funding acquisition, M.V. and T.A.; resources, T.A.
Funding: This research was funded by Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs, grant number KB22-002-005.
Acknowledgments: The authors acknowledge use of Nigerian case-study results from projects funded by
CGIAR-A4NH Flagship Food Systems for Healthier Diets for workshops in Nigeria, and from Multi-Donor
Trust Fund for Sustainable Logistics (MDTD-SL) administrated by theWorld Bank. They also wish to thank the
editor, the editorial staff, and the anonymous reviewers, for helping bring the article to its current state.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.
References
1. Affognon, H.; Mutungi, C.; Sanginga, P.; Borgemeister, C. Unpacking Postharvest Losses in Sub-Saharan
Africa: A Meta-Analysis. World Dev. 2015, 66, 49–68. [CrossRef]
2. HLPE Food Losses and Waste in the Context of Sustainable Food Systems. The High Level Panel of Experts on
Food Security and Nutrition; FAO: Rome, Italy, 2014; p. 117.
3. Kader, A.A. Increasing food availability by reducing postharvest losses of fresh produce. In Acta Horticulturae;
International Society for Horticultural Science (ISHS): Leuven, Belgium, 2005; pp. 2169–2176.
4. Kader, A.A. Postharvest biology and technology: An overview. In Postharvest Technology of Horticultural Crops;
University of California Agriculture and Natural Resources: Oakland, CA, USA, 2002; ISBN 978-1-879906-51-8.
5. Ippolito, A.; Nigro, F. Impact of preharvest application of biological control agents on postharvest diseases
of fresh fruits and vegetables. Crop Prot. 2000, 19, 715–723. [CrossRef]
6. Singleton, G. Impacts of Rodents on Rice Production in Asia 2003. Available online: http://books.irri.org/
971220183X_content.pdf (accessed on 18 January 2019).
7. John, A. Rodent outbreaks and rice pre-harvest losses in Southeast Asia. Food Secur. 2014, 6, 249–260.
[CrossRef]
8. Gunders, D. Wasted: How America Is Losing Up to 40 Percent of Its Food from Farm to Fork to Landfill; Natural
Resources Defense Council: New York, NY, USA, 2012.
9. IFPRI Toward a sustainable food system: Reducing food loss and waste. In Global Food Policy Report; IFPRI:
Washington, DC, USA, 2016; p. 10.
10. Gourdji, S.; Läderach, P.; Valle, A.M.; Martinez, C.Z.; Lobell, D.B. Historical climate trends, deforestation,
and maize and bean yields in Nicaragua. Agric. For. Meteorol. 2015, 200, 270–281. [CrossRef]
11. Lesk, C.; Rowhani, P.; Ramankutty, N. Influence of extreme weather disasters on global crop production.
Nature 2016, 529, 84–87. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
118
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
12. Bandyopadhyay, R.; Kumar, M.; Leslie, J.F. Relative severity of aflatoxin contamination of cereal crops in
West Africa. Food Addit. Contam. 2007, 24, 1109–1114. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Öztürk, F.P.; Kaçal, E.; Sarısu, H.C.; Karamürsel, D.; Emre, M. Economic evaluation of preharvest and harvest
losses in “0900 ziraat” sweet cherry cultivar. In Acta Hortic; International Society for Horticultural Science
(ISHS): Leuven, Belgium, 2010; pp. 261–267.
14. Scott, R.K.; English, S.D.;Wood, D.W.; Unsworth, M.H. The yield of sugar beet in relation to weather and
length of growing season. J. Agric. Sci. 1973, 81, 339–347. [CrossRef]
15. Shivrain, V.K.; Burgos, N.R.; Gealy, D.R.; Smith, K.L.; Scott, R.C.; Mauromoustakos, A.; Black, H. Red Rice
(Oryza sativa) Emergence Characteristics and Influence on Rice Yield at Different Planting Dates. Weed Sci.
2009, 57, 94–102. [CrossRef]
16. George, T.; Magbanua, R.; Garrity, D.P.; Tubana, B.; Quiton, J. Rapid Yield Loss of Rice Cropped Successively
in Aerobic Soil. Agron. J. 2002, 94, 981–989. [CrossRef]
17. Jatav, K.S.; Agarwal, R.; Singh, R.; Shrivastava, M. Growth and Yield Responses of Wheat [Triticum aestivum L.]
to SuboptimalWater Supply and Different Potassium Doses. J. Funct. Environ. Bot. 2012, 2, 39. [CrossRef]
18. Dangler, J.M.; Locascio, S.J. External and Internal Blotchy Ripening and Fruit Elemental Content of
Trickle-irrigated Tomatoes as Affected by N and K Application Time. J. Am. Soc. Hortic. Sci. 1990, 115, 547–549.
19. Oerke, E.-C. Crop losses to pests. J. Agric. Sci. 2006, 144, 31–43. [CrossRef]
20. Thompson, L.M. Weather Variability, Climatic Change, and Grain Production. Science 1975, 188, 535–541.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
21. Lusk, J.L.; Tack, J.; Hendricks, N.P. Heterogeneous Yield Impacts from Adoption of Genetically Engineered
Corn and the Importance of Controlling forWeather. Agric. Product. Prod. Behav. 2018.
22. Abass, A.B.; Ndunguru, G.; Mamiro, P.; Alenkhe, B.; Mlingi, N.; Bekunda, M. Post-harvest food losses in
a maize-based farming system of semi-arid savannah area of Tanzania. J. Stored Prod. Res. 2014, 57, 49–57.
[CrossRef]
23. Hill, R.V.; Viceisza, A. A field experiment on the impact of weather shocks and insurance on risky investment.
Exp. Econ. 2012, 15, 341–371. [CrossRef]
24. Gardas, B.B.; Raut, R.D.; Narkhede, B. Modeling causal factors of post-harvesting losses in vegetable and
fruit supply chain: An Indian perspective. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 80, 1355–1371. [CrossRef]
25. Ghimire, R.; Wen-chi, H.; Shrestha, R.B. Factors Affecting Adoption of Improved Rice Varieties among Rural
Farm Households in Central Nepal. Rice Sci. 2015, 22, 35–43. [CrossRef]
26. Shiferaw, B.; Kebede, T.; Kassie, M.; Fisher, M. Market imperfections, access to information and technology
adoption in Uganda: Challenges of overcoming multiple constraints. Agric. Econ. 2015, 46, 475–488.
[CrossRef]
27. Floro IV, V.O.; Labarta, R.A.; López-Lavalle, L.A.B.; Martinez, J.M.; Ovalle, T.M. Household Determinants
of the Adoption of Improved Cassava Varieties using DNA Fingerprinting to Identify Varieties in Farmer
Fields: A Case Study in Colombia. J. Agric. Econ. 2017, 69, 518–536. [CrossRef]
28. Bozo˘ glu, M.; Ceyhan, V. Measuring the technical efficiency and exploring the inefficiency determinants of
vegetable farms in Samsun province, Turkey. Agric. Syst. 2007, 94, 649–656. [CrossRef]
29. Wilson, P.; Hadley, D.; Asby, C. The influence of management characteristics on the technical efficiency of
wheat farmers in eastern England. Agric. Econ. 2001, 24, 329–338. [CrossRef]
30. Tanaka, D.L.; Krupinsky, J.M.; Liebig, M.A.; Merrill, S.D.; Ries, R.E.; Hendrickson, J.R.; Johnson, H.A.;
Hanson, J.D. Dynamic cropping systems: An adaptable approach to crop production in the Great Plains.
Agron. J. 2002, 94, 957–961. [CrossRef]
31. Planning Commission Report of the High Level High Level Expert Group on Water Logging in Punjab; Government
of India: New Delhi, India, 2013; p. 95.
32. Gustavsson, J.; Cederberg, C.; Sonesson, U. Global Food Losses and Food Waste: Extent, Causes and Prevention;
Study Conducted for the International Congress Save Food! at Interpack 2011, [16–17 May], Düsseldorf, Germany;
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations: Rome, Italy, 2011.
33. Gulden, R.H.; Shirtliffe, S.J.; Thomas, A.G. Harvest losses of canola (Brassica napus) cause large seedbank
inputs. Weed Sci. 2003, 51, 83–86. [CrossRef]
34. Hodges, R.J.; Buzby, J.C.; Bennett, B. Postharvest losses and waste in developed and less developed countries:
Opportunities to improve resource use. J. Agric. Sci. 2011, 149, 37–45. [CrossRef]
119
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
35. Bednarz, C.W.; Shurley, W.D.; Anthony, W.S. Losses in Yield, Quality, and Profitability of Cotton from
Improper Harvest Timing. Agron. J. 2002, 94, 1004–1011. [CrossRef]
36. Philbrook, B.D.; Oplinger, E.S. Soybean Field Losses as Influenced by Harvest Delays. Agron. J. 1989, 81,
251–258. [CrossRef]
37. Price, J.S.; Hobson, R.N.; Neale, M.A.; Bruce, D.M. Seed Losses in Commercial Harvesting of Oilseed Rape.
J. Agric. Eng. Res. 1996, 65, 183–191. [CrossRef]
38. Kantor, L.S.; Lipton, K.; Manchester, A.; Oliveira, V. Estimating and Addressing America’s Food Losses.
Food Rev. 1997, 20, 2–12.
39. Dag, A.; Kerem, Z.; Yogev, N.; Zipori, I.; Lavee, S.; Ben-David, E. Influence of time of harvest and maturity
index on olive oil yield and quality. Sci. Hortic. 2011, 127, 358–366. [CrossRef]
40. Buckmaster, D.R.; Heinrichs, A.J. Losses and Quality Changes during Harvest and Storage of
Preservative-treated Alfalfa Hay of Varying Moisture Content. Trans. ASAE 1993, 36, 349–353. [CrossRef]
41. Kaaya, A.N.;Warren, H.L.; Kyamanywa, S.; Kyamuhangire,W. The effect of delayed harvest on moisture
content, insect damage, moulds and aflatoxin contamination of maize in Mayuge district of Uganda. J. Sci.
Food Agric. 2005, 85, 2595–2599. [CrossRef]
42. Hell, K.; Fandohan, P.; Ranajit, B.; Kiewnick, S.; Sikora, R.; Cotty, P.J. Pre- and postharvest management of
aflatoxin in maize: An African perspective. In Mycotoxins: Detection Methods, Management, Public Health
and Agricultural Trade; Leslie, J.F., Bandyopadhyay, R., Visconti, A., Eds.; CABI: Wallingford, UK, 2008;
pp. 219–229. ISBN 978-1-84593-082-0.
43. Prandini, A.; Tansini, G.; Sigolo, S.; Filippi, L.; Laporta, M.; Piva, G. On the occurrence of aflatoxin M1 in
milk and dairy products. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2009, 47, 984–991. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Alakonya, A.E.; Monda, E.O.; Ajanga, S. Effect of Delayed Harvesting on Maize Ear Rot inWestern Kenya.
Am.-Eurasian J. Agric. Environ. Sci. 2008, 4, 372–380.
45. Kader, A.A.; Rolle, R.S. The role of Post-Harvest Management in Assuring the Quality and Safety of Horticultural
Produce; FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin; Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations:
Rome, Italy, 2004; ISBN 978-92-5-105137-5.
46. Lee, S.K.; Kader, A.A. Preharvest and postharvest factors influencing vitamin C content of horticultural
crops. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2000, 20, 207–220. [CrossRef]
47. Hobson, R.N.; Bruce, D.M. PM—Power and Machinery: Seed Loss when Cutting a Standing Crop of Oilseed
Rape with Two Types of Combine Harvester Header. Biosyst. Eng. 2002, 81, 281–286. [CrossRef]
48. Kitinoja, L.; Kader, A.A. Small-Scale Postharvest Handling Practices: A Manual for Horticultural Crops, 5th ed.;
Postharvest Horticulture Series; Postharvest Technology Research and Information Center, University of
California-Davis: Davis, CA, USA, 2015.
49. Mutiga, S.K.; Were, V.; Hoffmann, V.; Harvey, J.W.; Milgroom, M.G.; Nelson, R.J. Extent and Drivers of
Mycotoxin Contamination: Inferences from a Survey of Kenyan Maize Mills. Phytopathology 2014, 104,
1221–1231. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Kabak, B.; Dobson, A.D.W.; Var, I. Strategies to Prevent Mycotoxin Contamination of Food and Animal Feed:
A Review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2006, 46, 593–619. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51. Choudhary, A.K.; Kumari, P. Management of Mycotoxin Contamination in Preharvest and Post Harvest
Crops: Present Status and Future Prospects. J. Phytol. 2010, 2, 37–52.
52. Oliver, S.P.; Jayarao, B.M.; Almeida, R.A. Foodborne Pathogens in Milk and the Dairy Farm Environment:
Food Safety and Public Health Implications. Foodborne Pathog. Dis. 2005, 2, 115–129. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Sofos, J.N. Challenges to meat safety in the 21st century. Meat Sci. 2008, 78, 3–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Sunderlin, W.D.; Resosudarmo, I.A.P.; Rianto, E.; Angelsen, A. The Effect of Indonesia’s Economic
Crisis on Small Farmers and Natural Forest Cover in the Outer Islands 2000. Available online: http:
//dlc.dlib.indiana.edu/dlc/bitstream/handle/10535/4358/Sunderlin-the-effect-of-indonesias-economiccrisis-
on-small-farmers-and-natural-forest-cover-in-the-outer-islands.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
(accessed on 18 January 2019).
55. Godfray, H.C.J.; Beddington, J.R.; Crute, I.R.; Haddad, L.; Lawrence, D.; Muir, J.F.; Pretty, J.; Robinson, S.;
Thomas, S.M.; Toulmin, C. Food Security: The Challenge of Feeding 9 Billion People. Science 2010, 327,
812–818. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Sudheer, K.P.; Indira, V. Post Harvest Technology of Horticultural Crops; New India Publishing: New Delhi,
India, 2007; ISBN 978-81-89422-43-1.
120
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
57. Richards, T.J.; Patterson, P.M. Hysteresis and the Shortage of Agricultural Labor. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 1998, 80,
683–695. [CrossRef]
58. Guan, Z.; Wu, F.; Roka, F.; Whidden, A. Agricultural Labor and Immigration Reform. Choices 2015, 30, 1–9.
59. Aguilar-Gallegos, N.; Muñoz-Rodríguez, M.; Santoyo-Cortés, H.; Aguilar-Ávila, J.; Klerkx, L. Information
networks that generate economic value: A study on clusters of adopters of new or improved technologies
and practices among oil palm growers in Mexico. Agric. Syst. 2015, 135, 122–132. [CrossRef]
60. Casamali, B.; Williamson, J.G.; Kovaleski, A.P.; Sargent, S.A.; Darnell, R.L. Mechanical Harvesting and
Postharvest Storage of Two Southern Highbush Blueberry Cultivars Grafted onto Vaccinium arboreum
Rootstocks. HortScience 2016, 51, 1503–1510. [CrossRef]
61. Stuart, T. Waste: Uncovering the Global Food Scandal; W. W. Norton: New York, NY, USA, 2009; ISBN
978-0-393-07735-3.
62. Dawson, A. Unprecedented Year for Potatoes as Thousands of Acres go Unharvested; Manit. Co-Oper: Winnipeg,
MB, Canada, 2018.
63. Vietnamnews Price Drop Forces Farmers to Leave Vegetables Unharvested. Available online: http:
//vietnamnews.vn/society/424383/price-drop-forces-farmers-to-leave-vegetables-unharvested.html
(accessed on 5 January 2019).
64. Freshplaza Argentina: Apples are Left Unharvested due to Low Prices. Available online: www.freshplaza.com/
article/2190490/argentina-apples-are-left-unharvested-due-to-low-prices/ (accessed on 5 January 2019).
65. Basavaraja, H.; Mahajanashetti, S.B.; Udagatti, N.C. Economic Analysis of Post-harvest Losses in Food Grains
in India: A Case Study of Karnataka. Agric. Econ. Res. Rev. 2007, 20, 117–126.
66. Reardon, T.; Gulati, A. The Supermarket Revolution in Developing Countries: Policies for Competitiveness with
Inclusiveness. Available online: https://ideas.repec.org/p/fpr/polbrf/2.html (accessed on 22 January 2019).
67. Thyberg, K.L.; Tonjes, D.J. Drivers of food waste and their implications for sustainable policy development.
Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 2016, 106, 110–123. [CrossRef]
68. Seto, K.C.; Ramankutty, N. Hidden linkages between urbanization and food systems. Science 2016, 352,
943–945. [CrossRef]
69. Aulakh, J.; Regmi, A.; Fulton, J.R.; Alexander, C. Estimating Post-Harvest Food Losses: Developing a Consistent
Global Estimation Framework; Agricultural and Applied Economics Association: Washington, DC, USA, 2013.
70. Kumar, D.; Kalita, P. Reducing Postharvest Losses during Storage of Grain Crops to Strengthen Food Security
in Developing Countries. Foods 2017, 6, 8. [CrossRef]
71. Rolle, R.S.; Asian Productivity Organization, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (Eds.)
Postharvest Management of Fruit and Vegetables in the Asia-Pacific Region; Asian Productivity Organization,
Food and Agricultural Organization: Tokyo, Japan; Rome, Italy, 2006; ISBN 978-92-833-2369-3.
72. Salin, V.; Nayga, R.M. A cold chain network for food exports to developing countries. Int. J. Phys. Distrib.
Logist. Manag. 2003, 33, 918–933. [CrossRef]
73. Sheahan, M.; Barrett, C.B. Review: Food loss and waste in Sub-Saharan Africa. Food Policy 2017, 70, 1–12.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
74. Lara, L.J.; Rostagno, M.H. Impact of Heat Stress on Poultry Production. Animals 2013, 3, 356–369. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
75. IMECHE Global Food: Waste Not, Want Not; Institute of Mechanical Engineers: London, UK, 2013; p. 36.
76. Thamaga-Chitja, J.M.; Hendriks, S.L.; Ortmann, G.F.; Green, M. Impact of maize storage on rural household
food security in Northern Kwazulu-Natal. J. Consum. Sci. 2004, 32. [CrossRef]
77. Tefera, T. Post-harvest losses in African maize in the face of increasing food shortage. Food Secur. 2012, 4,
267–277. [CrossRef]
78. Parmar, A.; Hensel, O.; Sturm, B. Post-harvest handling practices and associated food losses and limitations
in the sweetpotato value chain of southern Ethiopia. NJAS Wageningen J. Life Sci. 2017, 80, 65–74. [CrossRef]
79. Ray, R.C.; Ravi, V. Post harvest spoilage of sweetpotato in tropics and control measures. Crit. Rev. Food Sci.
Nutr. 2005, 45, 623–644. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80. Bell, C.H. Fumigation in the 21st century. Crop Prot. 2000, 19, 563–569. [CrossRef]
81. Flinn, P.W.; Hagstrum, D.W.; Reed, C.; Phillips, T.W. United States department of agriculture–Agricultural
Research Service stored-grain areawide Integrated Pest Management program. Pest Manag. Sci. 2003, 59,
614–618. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
82. Ait-Oubahou, A. Postharvest technologies in sub-saharan Africa: Status, problems and recommendations
for improvements. In Acta Hortic; International Society for Horticultural Science (ISHS): Leuven, Belgium,
2013; pp. 1273–1282.
83. Ng’ang’a, J.; Mutungi, C.; Imathiu, S.M.; Affognon, H. Low permeability triple-layer plastic bags prevent
losses of maize caused by insects in rural on-farm stores. Food Secur. 2016, 8, 621–633. [CrossRef]
84. Worldbank (Ed.) Reshaping Economic Geography; World Development Report; World Bank: Washington, DC,
USA, 2009; ISBN 978-0-8213-7607-2.
85. Hummels, D.L.; Schaur, G. Time as a Trade Barrier. Am. Econ. Rev. 2013, 103, 2935–2959. [CrossRef]
86. Saurav, S.; Potti, R. Cold Chain Logistics in India: A Study. In Innovative Solutions for Implementing Global
Supply Chains in Emerging Markets; IGI Global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2016; pp. 159–172.
87. Mhazo, N.; Mvumi, B.M.; Nyakudya, E.; Nazare, R.M. The status of the agro-processing industry in
Zimbabwe with particular reference to small- and medium-scale enterprises. Afr. J. Agric. Res. 2011, 7.
88. Walters, S.A.; Groninger, J.W.; Oval Myers, J. Rebuilding Afghanistan’s agricultural economy: Vegetable
production in Balkh Province. Outlook Agric. 2012, 41. [CrossRef]
89. Schroeder, H.A. Losses of vitamins and trace minerals resulting from processing and preservation of foods.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1971, 24, 562–573. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
90. FUSIONS Estimates of European Food Waste Levels; Food Use for Social Innovation by Optimising Waste
Prevention Strategies; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2016.
91. Higgins, K.T. Flash Dryers and PotatoWaste. Available online: https://www.foodengineeringmag.com/
articles/83689-flash-dryers-and-potato-waste (accessed on 29 November 2018).
92. Neff, R.A.; Spiker, M.L.; Truant, P.L. Wasted Food: U.S. Consumers’ reported awareness, attitudes, and
behaviors. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0127881. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93. ABB Ability System 800xA for world’s Largest Milk Cooperative Amul in India—ABB Process Control
Solutions for Food and Beverage Manufacturing (ABB Process Automation and Control Solutions by
Industry). Available online: https://new.abb.com/control-systems/industry-specific-solutions/foodbeverage/
system-800xa-for-world-s-largest-milk-cooperative-amul-india (accessed on 28 November 2018).
94. Jamal, R. Saving Milk from Spoilage in Rural India. Available online: https://www.theguardian.com/
sustainable-business/saving-milk-rural-india-business-sustainable (accessed on 28 November 2018).
95. Plaisier, C.; Sibomana, M.; van der Waal, J.; Clercx, L.; van Wagenberg, C.P.A.; Dijkxhoorn, Y. Approach
for Designing Context-Specific, Locally Owned Interventions to Reduce Postharvest Losses: Case Study on
Tomato Value Chains in Nigeria. Sustainability 2019, 11, 247. [CrossRef]
96. Tilahun, S.; Do, S.P.; Mu, H.S.; Cheon, S.J. Review on factors affecting the quality and antioxidant properties
of tomatoes. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 2017, 16, 1678–1687.
97. Okoli, C.A.N.; Erinle, I.D. Factors responsible for market losses of tomato fruits in the Zaria area of Nigeria.
J. Hortic. Sci. 1989, 64, 69–71. [CrossRef]
98. Akangbe, J.A.; Ogundiran, T.J.; Komolafe, S.E.; Ifabiyi, J.O.; Ajibola, B.O. Tomato farmers adoption level of
postharvest value addition technology and its constraints in Surulere Area of Oyo State, Nigeria. J. Agric.
Soc. Res. 2014, 14, 91–97.
99. Arah, I.K.; Kumah, E.K.; Anku, E.K.; Amaglo, H. An Overview of Post-Harvest Losses in Tomato Production
in Africa: Causes and Possible Prevention Strategies. J. Biol. Agric. Healthc. 2015, 5, 78–88.
100. Wokoma, E.C.W. Preliminary Report on Diseases of Tomato in Choba, Rivers State. J. Appl. Sci. Environ.
Manag. 2008, 12. [CrossRef]
101. Etebu, E.; Nwauzoma, A.B.; Bawo, D.D.S. Postharvest spoilage of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.)
and control strategies in Nigeria. J. Biol. 2013, 3.
102. Ganiyu, S.A.; Popoola, A.R.; Enikuomehin, O.A.; Bodunde, J.G. Influence of grafting on growth and yield
performance of two tomato cultivars grown in open field in Nigeria. J. Plant Pathol. 2018, 100, 43–50.
[CrossRef]
103. Ekundayo, E.A.; Ekundayo, F.O.; Osinowo, I.A. Antifungal activities of Trichoderma viride and two fungicides
in controlling diseases caused by Sclerotium rolfsii on tomato plants. Adv. Appl. Sci. Res. 2015, 6, 12–19.
104. Umeh, V.C.; Onukwu, D. Development of environmentally-friendly tomato insect pest control options under
tropical conditions. J. Veg. Sci. 2005, 11, 73–84. [CrossRef]
122
Sustainability 2019, 11, 579
105. Olayemi, F.; Adegbola, J.; Bamishaiye, E.; Daura, A. Assessment of post-harvest challenges of small scale
farm holders of tomotoes, bell and hot pepper in some local government areas of Kano State, Nigeria.
Bayero J. Pure Appl. Sci. 2011, 3. [CrossRef]
106. Adepoju, A.O. Post-harvest losses and welfare of tomato farmers in Ogbomosho, Osun state, Nigeria.
J. Stored Prod. Postharvest Res. 2014, 5, 8–13.
107. Olosunde,W.A.; Aremu, A.K.; Onwude, D.I. Development of a solar powered evaporative cooling storage
system for tropical fruits and vegetables. J. Food Process. Preserv. 2016, 40, 279–290. [CrossRef]
108. Animashaun, M.O.; Bishop, C.F.H.; Cullum, J. The use of hot water treatment for the control of Alternaria
alternata in tomato. In Proceedings of the Acta Horticulturae; International Society for Horticultural Science
(ISHS): Leuven, Belgium, 2016; pp. 233–240.
109. Raji, O.A.; Oriola, O.K. Packaging and handling methods as sources of mechanical damage in tomatoes in
transit. J. Eng. Appl. Sci. 2007, 2, 1450–1454.
110. Idah, P.A.; Ajisegiri, E.S.A.; Yisa, M.G. Fruits and Vegetables Handling and Transportation in Nigeria. AU J.
Technol. 2007, 10, 175–183.
111. Rosegrant, M.W.; Magalhaes, E.; Valmonte-Santos, R.A.; Mason-D’Croz, D. Returns to Investment in Reducing
Postharvest Food Losses and Increasing Agricultural Productivity Growth. Available online: http://www.ifpri.
org/publication/returns-investment-reducing-postharvest-food-losses-and-increasing-agricultural (accessed
on 22 January 2019).
© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
123
sustainability
Article
Drivers of Vegetable Consumption in Urban Nigeria:
Food Choice Motives, Knowledge, and Self-Efficacy
Ireen Raaijmakers 1,*, Harriette Snoek 1, Busie Maziya-Dixon 2 and Thom Achterbosch 1
1 Wageningen Economic Research,Wageningen University & Research, P.O. Box 29703, 2502 LS The Hague,
The Netherlands; harriette.snoek@wur.nl (H.S.); thom.achterbosch@wur.nl (T.A.)
2 International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), Headquarters andWest Africa Hub, PMB 5320,
Oyo Road, Ibadan 200001, Oyo State, Nigeria; B.Maziya-Dixon@cgiar.org
* Correspondence: ireen.raaijmakers@wur.nl; Tel.: +31-(0)70-3358208
Received: 27 November 2018; Accepted: 11 December 2018; Published: 14 December 2018 	

Abstract: Objective: This study aimed to provide insights into vegetable consumption behavior of
urban Nigerian consumers across different Socio-Economic Classes (SEC), their main food choice
motives, and the associations of these motives and other drivers with vegetable consumption.
Methods: An online survey was conducted in which 1220 women from Lagos (N = 808) and Ibadan
(N = 412) metropolis from different SEC participated. Results: On average, respondents reported to
consume 2.6 portions of vegetables per day. Most vegetables were bought at open and traditional
markets, were bought fresh rather than processed, and were consumed cooked. Respondents from
the second richest and upper middle SEC consumed most vegetables () and higher SEC consumed a
larger variety of vegetables compared to those from lower classes. Respondents who reported to have
a higher knowledge of vegetable consumption, had a higher belief in one’s own ability to prepare
vegetables (self-efficacy), and those that valued the food motive Mood and Health more, reported
a higher vegetable intake. Conclusions: Vegetable consumption in the studied cities in Nigeria
was below recommendations. Increasing knowledge and self-efficacy might be a way to increase
consumption, especially in combination with interventions in the food environment and product
design focused on the motives Health and Mood, and considering the importance of differences
between SEC.
Keywords: vegetable consumption; food choice motives; knowledge; self-efficacy; socio-economic
classes; food environment; Nigeria
1. Introduction
Globally more people live in urban than in rural areas and by 2050, 66% of the world’s population
is projected to be urban. It is expected that more than half of this growth will occur in Africa, whereby
Nigeria will stand out [1–3].
Urbanization, in combination with economic and social development, leads to a change in
dietary patterns and nutrient intake: This process is called ‘nutrition transition’ [4], and contributes
to increasing health burdens and Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) worldwide and especially in
developing countries [5]. It is shown that when income rises the consumption of foods associated
with a high-quality diet increases (including fruit, vegetables and milk). However, the consumption
of products associated with a low quality diet (e.g., fast food, sugar-sweetened beverages) increases
even more strongly. When income rises, the budget share of vegetables in total food expenditures
declines [6]. With its large and quickly expanding urban population with rapidly accumulating wealth
and rapid changes in food habits, Nigeria will face new, multiple and different challenges regarding
food security and food systems, health burdens and NCDs [7,8]. While the nutrition transition is still
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771; doi:10.3390/su10124771 124 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771
in an early stage in Nigeria [9,10], an increase in the incidence of obesity and related NCDs is already
observed in urban and rural areas in Nigeria [10,11].
This study aims to contribute to sustainable healthy eating patterns in urban areas in Low- and
Middle-Income Countries (LMICs), in this case urban Nigeria. For this, insights into the underlying
determinants of healthy food choices is essential, in the broader context of the food environment.
Insights into the motives and barriers that consumer experience, as well as the relation between drivers
of behavior, and food purchase and consumption behavior, provides insights into the opportunities
and threats for changing the diet.
Within the present study, we focus on vegetable consumption behavior, as vegetable consumption
is a commonly recommended element in a balanced and healthy eating pattern. An adequate
consumption of vegetables could lead to significant improvements in public health, as it reduces the risk
of the development of chronic diseases (e.g., heart diseases, high blood pressure, diabetes and obesity),
several cancers and prevents or alleviates several micronutrient deficiencies (e.g., References [12–14]).
Despite its importance the daily consumption of vegetables is insufficient in Nigeria [15–18].
Reliable data on food intake in populations in developing countries (including Nigeria) are scarce and
limited, meaning that the mentioned numbers may deviate from actual consumption [6]. In the latest
national survey 12.4% of the households reported to consume leafy vegetables, and 16.3% consumed
non-leafy vegetables, at least once or twice per week. In urban areas, 11.1% of the households indicated
to consume at least once or twice a week leafy vegetables and 16.6% indicated to consume non-leafy
vegetables at the same frequency [15].
Several potential barriers to increasing vegetable consumption in urban areas of Nigeria are
observed in the literature. Limited year-round availability, affordability, need for convenience, food
safety issues and the attraction to the modern orWestern lifestyles are mentioned as constraints for
healthy food choices by urban middle class consumers in Lagos [19]. Next, cultural beliefs and taboos,
and religious beliefs are also found to influence the food choices of consumers [20]. Regarding the
vegetable availability, this is region- and season-dependent, and products are mostly eaten fresh, since
storage possibilities are few and substantial losses occur due to inadequate preservation and transport.
Also at the national level, the availability of vegetables is insufficient to meet the recommended
levels of intake [21]. For lower Social Economic Classes (SEC), the affordability of vegetables is
problematic due to low purchasing power of households, and necessities to prioritize energy-dense
foods which are generally cheaper. Across all urban consumers, including the lower SEC, constraints in
the time available for shopping and preparation of food appears to drive consumers towards increased
consumption outside the home. Convenient foods are typically high in fat and carbohydrates, and
low in vegetables and other nutrient-dense foods. Those seeking to shift to healthier, but convenient
alternatives, such as fish, fresh fruits and vegetables, are faced with the increasingly expensive costs of
nutritious foods relative to the fast-food alternatives.
Motivation represents the individual’s willingness to change behavior [22]. The motivational
factors determining an individual’s intention are the attitude towards and social norms regarding the
behavior [23]. Consumers have different motivations for choosing different types of food products.
These so-called food choice motives (FCM) are consumers’ motives, reasons or motivations for choosing
or eating food products and provide valuable insight into the underlying consumer drivers [24]. They
are associated with intake of food products, including vegetable intake [25,26]. Individuals are
motivated to behave when they can discern that their self-interest will be served. As such, self-interest
is a strong component of motivation [27]. Steptoe and colleagues (1995) developed an instrument
to assess the impact of different reasons for making food choices, the Food Choice Questionnaire
(FCQ) [24]. This multidimensional scale consists of 36 items, representing both health and non-health
related food characteristics, classified into nine different motivational dimensions, measuring the
importance of Health, Mood, Sensory appeal, Natural content, Weight control, Familiarity, Price
and Ethical concern in food choice. Despite its relevance, the FCQ is mostly applied in high income
countries, and to a limited extent in LMIC. The FCQ was applied in one African country, namely
125
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771
Cape Verde [28]. In this study the identified motives slightly differed with the motives found in the
study by Steptoe et al. (1995). The most important motive was Well-being (combination of health and
mood), followed by Sensory appeal, Nutritional aspects and diet (combination of nutrition and weight
control), Natural content and Price [28].
A well-known model to describe why consumers perform certain behaviors and how these
behaviors can be changed is the Motivation—Opportunity—Ability (MOA) model [22]. In this model,
people need the motivation and the environmental or contextual opportunity to eat healthily. On
top of the motivation and opportunity people need to be able to conduct the intended behavior and
therefore ability is the third factor in the MOA model. Ability refers to skills and knowledge to perform
behaviors. On the one hand, this refers to more practical skills and knowledge that are needed, such
as cooking techniques for preparing vegetables, knowledge on recommended vegetable intake, etc.
Subjective knowledge, someone’s own perception of his/her level of knowledge has been related to
the acceptation and evaluation of products [29]. In LMICs subjective knowledge has been related
to food safety [30,31]. Another central concept in the ability literature is self-efficacy or perceived
behavior control. This is the belief that someone has the capability to perform a certain behavior [32].
It is specific to a certain behavior, for example someone can be confident about being able to limit
his or her intake of sugary drinks, but not to have adequate amounts of fruit intake. Self-efficacy
is assumed to reflect true personal abilities and skills and therefore relate to behavior [33], and an
important predictor of health behavior change [34]. In the Theory of Planned Behavior for example,
perceived behavior control is related to both intention and behavior (e.g., Reference [23]). However, in
LMICs some studies applied the self-efficacy scale in domains related to computer use, job search and
HIV, but very limited to healthy eating or the consumption of fruits and vegetables.
One of the most relevant socio-demographic variables that influence food choice and consumption
is SEC. SEC relates to the persons’ position in society and is operationalized in various ways, including
income, occupational level, educational level or wealth (assets) [35–37]. Research conducted in high
income countries has found that SEC influence food choice and intake. More precisely, it was found
that low SEC consumers are more likely to have a less healthy diet and consume less fruit, vegetables
and fibers compared to high SEC consumers [38,39]. A study conducted in Uruguay confirmed the
influence of income level on the underlying FCM and barriers to the adoption of healthy eating
between low and middle SEC. It was found that low SEC respondents described their choices as mainly
driven by economic factors and physical needs (e.g., satiety), whereas product-related characteristics
(i.e., convenience) were mainly determined for middle SEC respondents [40].
The Present Study
To summarize, current obesity rates and micro-nutrient deficiencies in LMICs underline the need
for dietary changes and even more when considering development in urbanization and nutritional
transition. Nigeria is one of the countries for which this is particularly true. Motives and the ability to
change are important drivers of consumer behavior, but little is known about the importance of these
determinants in LMICs in general and in Nigeria in particular.
With this study, we aimed to get more insights regarding the vegetable consumption behavior of
urban Nigerians across different SEC, their main FCM, and the associations of these motives and other
drivers with vegetable consumption. Specific objectives were to first to describe the local vegetable
situation, vegetable intake and purchase behavior; second, to describe the importance of the different
FCM for the urban Nigerian consumer; third, to determine the association between motivation and
ability (subjective knowledge and self-efficacy) with vegetable intake, and fourth, to investigate
differences in vegetable consumption and determinants of consumption across the different SEC.
Additionally to the results of this study, implications will be discussed in the food system perspective
as consumer and consumer choices cannot be considered separately from the food environment, i.e.,
the context in which food choices are made. This food environment in turn consists of a large number
of chains and actors and is a dynamic system in which influences and trade-offs occur.
126
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Study Design and Respondents
Data were collected through an online survey in Lagos and Ibadan, Nigeria. The International
research agency IPSOS located in Lagos, Nigeria, collected the data in November 2016. The
questionnaire was administered by a trained interviewer using a structured interview reading out
loud the questions from the questionnaire on a mobile device, and if applicable supported by show
cards. Show cards were developed and used to present the included vegetable answering scales
visually to the respondent. The show cards with vegetables were used to have a shared perception
of vegetables and the show cards with answering categories were used so that respondents did not
have to memorize them. Respondents were recruited across different districts in Lagos and Ibadan,
and were only included if they were the key decision makers in the purchase of groceries within their
household and when they were one of the persons that bought the groceries. Respondents freely
participated and received an incentive after finishing the questionnaire. A pretest of the questionnaire
was conducted before the start of the fieldwork.
In total, 1220 female respondents were included in the study. The average age of the sample was
32.4 years (range 18–55). The demographics of the respondents are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Demographic characteristics of the study sample (N = 1220 females).
N = %/Mean
City Lagos 808 66.2
Ibadan 412 33.8
Average age (range 18–55) 32.42
Family status Married/living with partner 896 73.4
Single 315 25.8
Divorced 9 0.7
People living in the household One 41 3.4
Two 84 6.9
Three 260 21.3
Four 385 31.6
Five 277 22.7
Six 107 8.8
Seven or more 66 5.4
Children living in the household Yes 902 73.9
No 278 22.8
Income level (monthly net income) Below N10,000 31 2.5
N10,001–N20,000 100 8.2
N20,001–N30,000 117 9.6
N30,001–N40,000 161 13.2
N40,001–N50,000 232 19.0
N50,001–N60,000 145 11.9
N60,001–N80,000 120 9.8
N80,001–N100,000 75 6.1
N100,001–N120,000 35 2.9
Above N120,001 44 3.6
Don’t know/Refuse 160 13.1
Employment Status Work full-time 208 17.0
Work part-time 100 8.2
Work informally (e.g., seamstress at home) 15 1.2
Unemployed 144 11.8
Retired 4 0.3
Student (not employed) 105 8.6
Housewife (not employed) 41 3.4
Self-employed 603 49.4
Ethnicity Hausa 23 19.9
Ibo 221 18.1
Yoruba 919 75.3
Others 57 4.7
127
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771
Table 1. Cont.
N = %/Mean
Religion Muslim 317 26.0
Christian 901 73.9
Others 2 0.1
Socio-Economic Class, based on assets 1 A—Richest 56 4.6
B—2nd Richest 105 8.6
C1—Middle class 129 10.6
C2—Middle class 246 20.2
D—2nd Poorest 684 56.1
Key decision maker for grocery shopping Yes, I am the key decision maker 886 72.6
Yes, I am one of the key decision makers within
our household 334 27.4
Buying groceries Yes, I am buying groceries for our household 940 77.0
Yes, I am one of the persons within our
household that buys groceries for our household 280 23.0
1 Respondents were allocated to the different socio-economic classes by their assets, such as ownership of durable,
facilities (cooking, water, sanitary), housing and are, educational level, and occupation.
2.2. Measures
2.2.1. Vegetable Buying and Consumption Behavior
To examine the buying behavior, questions related to the following topics were included: (i) The
form in which vegetables were bought (fresh, dried, canned and frozen), and (ii) buying place (market,
street vendor, convenience or small grocery store, and supermarket). The consumption pattern of
different types of vegetables (e.g., tomatoes, onions, cucumber, carrots, okra) was explored by asking
the consumption frequency with the following categories to choose from: Never, less than once a
month, monthly, weekly and daily.
To estimate the respondents’ usual vegetable intake, the standardized Food Frequency
Questionnaire (FFQ), developed and validated by Van Assema et al. (2002) was applied. This FFQ
measures usual fruit and vegetable intake. FFQs are considered a suitable tool to rank individuals
according to their usual consumption of foods or food categories [41]. As we aimed to identify and
rank the SEC on their usual vegetable consumption behavior, the FFQ fitted the best whereas it is
less suitable for establishing the level of intake of a population. Respondents indicated their usual
consumption frequency (number of days per week) and usual consumption amount of both cooked
and raw vegetables (number of servings in spoons). These data were converted in three steps to
determine total vegetable intake: Converting intake levels into meaningful data (into portion sizes),
multiplying the intake frequency by portion sizes, and adding together the subgroups raw and heated
vegetables [42].
2.2.2. Socio-Psychological Determinants
To measure the underlying food choice motives the Food Choice Questionnaire (FCQ) developed by
Steptoe et al. (1995) was used. The FCQ consists of 36 items, representing both health and non-health
related food characteristics. Each item was introduced by the affirmative sentence “It is important
to you that the food you eat on a typical day . . . ” followed by each motive, and evaluated by the
respondent on a 7-point Likert scale, going from 1 = not important at all to 7 = extremely important.
An Exploratory and Confirmatory Factor Analysis (EFA and CFA) were conducted to determine the
underlying structure of the questionnaire. The EFA indicated four factors based on the scree plot
of the EigenValue, and eight factors based on an EigenValue of above 1.0., with a total explained
the variance of 57.4%. These results differ from the nine factors presented by Steptoe et al. (1995).
CFA was conducted with nine factors (fixed). The output did not reveal the pattern mix “Rotation
failed to converge in 25 iterations (convergence = 0.004)”. Iterations of 35 were needed to conduct
the CFA with nine factors. This output revealed that the factor “Convenience” would be split into
128
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771
“Convenience-preparing” and “Convenience-buying”. After examining the results, the eight-factor
solution was chosen, as the four-factor structure did not provide a clear pattern. All items loaded
0.30 or more on one of the factors. Regarding the sample size of this study, this is enough to have
practical significance [43]. Five of the items that loaded more than 0.30 on more than one factor have
been deleted. These items were “Looks nice”, “Can be bought in shops close to where I live or work”,
“Is easily available in shops and supermarkets”, “Has a pleasant texture”, and “Is like the food I ate
when I was a child”. Next one factor was deleted, as it only included one item “Is high in fibre and
roughage”. The items factor loading and Cronbach’s α of the remaining items are shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Factor loading and Cronbach’s α for Food Choice Questionnaire (FCQ).
Factor Item Factor Loading Cronbach’s α
Mood Keeps me awake/alert 0.783 0.83
Cheers me up 0.713
Helps me relax 0.638
Helps me to cope with life 0.613
Is good for my skin/teeth/hair/nails etc. 0.514
Makes me feel good 0.495
Helps me to cope with stress 0.486
Is packaged in an environmentally friendly way 0.404
Smells nice 0.403
Convenience Is easy to prepare 0.850 0.87
Can be cooked very simply 0.825
Takes no time to prepare 0.803
Ethical concern
Comes from countries I approve politically 0.887 N.A 1
Has the country of origin clearly marked 0.880
Natural Content
andWeight
Control
Is low in fat −0.735 0.83
Is low in calories −0.646
Helps me control my weight −0.637
Contains no artificial ingredients −0.606
Contains natural ingredients −0.575
Contains no additives −0.551
Price Is not expensive 0.846 0.73
Is cheap 0.809
Is good value for money 0.597
Familiar Is familiar 0.790 N.A 1
Is what I usually eat 0.776
Health Contains a lot of vitamins and minerals 0.752 0.69
Keeps me healthy 0.719
Is nutritious 0.716
Is high in protein 0.512
1 As the factor consists of two items it was not possible to calculate the Cronbach’s α.
The respondents’ own perception of their knowledge about vegetables was measured with the
three item-scale subjective knowledge scale developed by Aertsens and colleagues (2011) [44]. The scale
included the following three items: “In comparison with an average person you know a lot about
vegetables”, “You know a lot about how to judge the quality of vegetables”, and “People who know
you, consider you as an expert in the field of vegetables”. Answers were given on a 7-point Likert scale
ranging from 1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree. The Cronbach’s α in this sample was 0.83.
The respondents’ beliefs in their own ability to prepare and increase their vegetable consumption
(self-efficacy) was measured with the following nine items: “You know how to prepare all vegetables”,
“You have a cook who prepares the vegetables for you”, “You can distinguish vegetables of good
quality from vegetables with a low quality”, “You like all kind of vegetables”, “You lack cooking skills
to make all kind of vegetables”, “You feel stressed when you have to prepare all kind of vegetables”,
“A lot of vegetables are difficult to cook”, “You are too busy to make meals with vegetables”, and
“You do not believe that vegetables are health”. Answers were given on a 7-point Likert scale ranging
from 1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree. After recoding the negatively formulated items,
129
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771
EFA indicated two-factor structure, based on the scree plot of the EigenValue, with a total explained
the variance of 53.3%. After examining the results, it was decided to use one factor structure, as one
factor included all the recorded items. The following items were deleted as this would increase the
Cronbach’s α: “You have a cook who prepared the vegetables for you” (from α0.56 to α0.71) and
“You like all kinds of vegetables” (from α0.71 to α0.72). The final scale consists of seven items, with a
Cronbach’s α of 0.72.
3. Results
3.1. Vegetable Buying and Consumption Behavior
The vast majority (97.7%) of the respondents indicated to buy their vegetables; only 2.3% of
the sample (n = 28) indicated to both buy and grow their own vegetables, and no one relied only on
self-grown vegetables. 99.8% of the respondents indicated to buy fresh vegetables for their household.
Fresh vegetables were most often bought at open markets (58.0%), followed by street vendors (19.6%)
and convenience stores/small grocery stores (19.2%). Supermarkets were the least likely outlet for
vegetables (3.2%). Similar results were found for canned, dried and frozen vegetables, although frozen
and canned vegetables were bought relatively more in supermarkets and convenience stores.
All respondents indicated to consume vegetables with on average 17.8 portions per week,
2.55 portions a day. Looking at the average consumption per week, the respondents indicated to
consume 12.9 (SD = 8.0) of cooked and 4.9 (SD = 5.8) of raw vegetables. One portion (serving spoon)
equals 50 g. Cooked vegetables were consumed on a daily basis by 44.3% of the respondents whereas
for raw vegetables this was 6.5%. Almost all respondents consumed fresh vegetables (99.8%) and
a majority consumed canned vegetables (58.9%), whereas dried and especially frozen vegetables
were consumed by a smaller percentage of the population (35.8% and 13.3% respectively). Tomatoes,
onions, small sweet peppers, hot peppers, carrots and green leafy vegetables were the most frequently
consumed types of vegetables (consumed by >90% of the respondents). Also, bell peppers, cucumber,
okra, baby corn, cabbage, green beans, and garden egg were consumed by a large majority (>70%) of
the respondents. Lettuce was consumed by 43.9% and pumpkin by 33.1% of the respondents. Other
vegetables (i.e., broccoli, beet roots, karalla, and zucchini) were consumed only by a minority of the
sample (<10%).
Significant differences regarding vegetable consumption were found between the different SEC
for both heated (F(4, 1219) = 3.1, p < 0.01) and raw vegetables (F(4, 1219) = 11.9, p < 0.001). Post-hoc
analyses showed that respondents from the second richest and upper middle class (SEC B and C1)
consumed more vegetables compared to the poor (SEC C2 and D) which was mostly attributable to
the consumption of raw vegetables (see Table 3). The rich and upper middle class (SEC A, B and C1)
were also more likely to consume frozen and canned vegetables than the poor (SEC C2 and D), and
they consumed a greater variety of vegetables, since they consume more often the less traditional
vegetable species.
3.2. Socio-Psychological Determinants
Regarding the FCM, overall the motive Health was considered the most important (M = 6.36). The
motives Mood, Natural, Price, Convenience and Familiar all scored high, more specifically between
5.91 and 5.31 on average (see Table 3). Ethical concerns were considered the least important motive.
The mean scores for subjective knowledge were M = 5.66, and self-efficacy was M = 5.58.
Significant differences were found between the SEC regarding the FCM Price, Mood, and Familiar.
Price was considered less important in the middle and highest SEC compared to the lower SEC.
Familiar and Mood were most important for the middle and less important for the highest SEC. Next,
small, but significant, differences were found between the SEC groups in perceived knowledge. The
middle-class group reported that they had a higher knowledge of vegetable consumption compared to
the lower SEC.
130
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771
Table 3. Vegetable consumption and the different socio-economic classes.
Total A B C1 C2 D F(4, 1219)
Vegetable intake 1
Total vegetable intake Mean 17.81 20.21 ab 21.15 a 21.62 a 16.71 b 16.78 b
SD 11.14 13.73 15.6 13.07 10.30 4 9.08 ***
Intake heated vegetables Mean 12.90 13.45 14.40 14.50 12.21 12.57
SD 8.00 9.37 9.32 9.35 7.55 7.49 3.05 **
Intake raw vegetables 1 Mean 4.91 6.76 abd 6.75 ab 7.12 ab 4.50 ade 4.21 e
SD 5.82 6.623 8.86 6.39 5.58 4.89 11.89 ***
Food Choice Motives 2
Health Mean 6.36 6.35 6.46 6.40 6.30 6.35 2227
SD 0.50 0.39 0.46 0.48 0.51 0.52
Mood Mean 5.86 5.61 c 6.01 a 5.93 ab 5.86 b 5.85 b 4311 **
SD 0.63 0.77 0.58 0.64 0.56 0.64
Natural content and
Weight control
Mean 5.78 5.76 5.96 5.84 5.77 5.75 1682
SD 0.80 0.66 0.75 0.78 0.76 0.84
Price Mean 5.69 5.38 c 5.69 ab 5.52 bc 5.64 ab 5.77 a 4318 **
SD 0.89 0.84 0.95 0.90 0.90 0.87
Convenience Mean 5.63 5.94 5.69 5.77 5.58 5.59 2173
SD 1.09 0.65 1.16 0.98 1.07 1.14
Familiar Mean 5.61 5.32 d 5.78 ab 5.79 a 5.54 cd 5.60 bc 3.495 **
SD 0.96 0.99 0.90 0.87 0.98 0.97
Ethical concern Mean 4.24 4.04 4.48 4.29 4.33 4.18 1291
SD 1.59 1.60 1.56 1.70 1.53 1.59
Subjective knowledge 3 Mean 5.66 5.91 ab 5.76 ab 5.87 a 5.57 b 5.62 b 2375 *
SD 1.19 1.04 1.07 1.16 1.26 1.19
Self-efficacy 3 Mean 5.58 5.34 5.72 5.67 5.56 5.57 2195
SD 0.85 0.85 0.92 0.89 0.90 0.81
1: Number of self-reported vegetable portions per week. 2: 7-point Likert scale is applied ranging from 1 = not
important at all to 7 = extremely important. 3: 7-point Likert scale is applied ranging from 1 = strongly disagree
to 7 = strongly agree. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001. abcde different letters indicate a significant difference
between clusters.
3.3. Determinants of Vegetable Consumption
Respondents who reported to have a higher knowledge of vegetable consumption, who valued
the food motive Mood and Health more, and who also had a higher self-efficacy reported a higher
vegetable intake. These associations were found after controlling for the positive relation between a
higher household size and a higher SEC status with vegetable intake. Age did not have an additional
association with vegetable intake. Although significant, the associations however were weak and in
total only 15.3% of the variance in food intake was explained by the variables (see Table 4).
Table 4. Results stepwise regression analysis on the drivers of vegetable intake.
Standardized Beta
Coefficients t-Value p-Value R2 Change
First step
(Constant) 13.181 0.000
0.038, F(5, 1214) = 9.50,
p < 0.001
Household size 0.093 3.298 0.001
SEC A 1 0.058 2.023 0.043
SEC B 1 0.110 3.813 0.000
SEC C1 1 0.132 4.546 0.000
SEC C2 1 −0.002 −0.057 0.955
Second step 2
Mood 0.316 8.608 0.000
0.114, F(9, 1205) = 17.99,
p < 0.001
Convenience 0.043 1.349 0.177
Ethical concern −0.023 −0.782 0.434
Natural content and weight control −0.006 −0.154 0.877
Price −0.049 −1.573 0.116
Familiar 0.038 1.305 0.192
Health −0.083 −2.480 0.013
Knowledge 0.085 2.883 0.004
Self−efficacy 0.077 2.455 0.014
1 Socio-economic status (SEC) as a dummy variable with the lowest SEC (D) as the reference. 2 Beta’s are reported
for the step when the variable was introduced.
131
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771
4. Discussion
4.1. Summary of the Main Results
This study provided insights into the vegetable consumption behavior of urban Nigerians across
different SEC. And it adds insights to the existing literature as it identified the main FCM of urban
Nigerians, and the associations of these motives and other drivers with vegetable consumption.
On average, the total consumption of vegetables was 2.55 portions per day whereas it is
recommended to eat at least 4 portions (200 g). Vegetables were considered a standard element
of meals, but a limited variety of vegetables was commonly consumed, both in terms of types of
vegetables eaten, degree of processing (i.e., mostly fresh), and outlets (i.e., mostly traditional open
markets). The respondents in the higher SEC consumed a greater variety of vegetables, especially
the ones that are considered exotic (e.g., broccoli, cauliflower) and they also ate more raw vegetables.
Regarding the drivers of vegetable consumption, we found support for the importance of motives
and ability variables. Respondents who reported a higher knowledge of vegetables and who had
a higher belief in ones’ own ability to prepare vegetables (self-efficacy) reported a higher vegetable
intake. Also, those who valued the FCM Mood and Health more, reported a higher vegetable intake.
Health was considered the most important FCM by the respondents, followed by Mood, Natural, Price,
Convenience and Familiar while Ethical concern was considered least important. Implications of these
findings will be considered in detail below.
4.2. Implications of the Main Results
The average vegetable consumption was below recommended levels. This is in accordance
with our expectations, as previous research revealed a low average vegetable consumption (e.g.,
References [15–17]). Reliable information on vegetable consumption in Nigeria is scarce and the
available data reveals a large range in the estimated consumption amount of vegetables from 59 g to
170 g [16,17]. This large range might be due to the influence of seasonality or due to different definitions
of vegetables in different studies (e.g., green leafy vegetables only versus all vegetables). Only one
study explicitly mentioned in its discussion that tomatoes, onions and peppers were excluded, because
of their ubiquitous use in the preparation of most of the soups in the Nigerian culture [18]. The results
of our pilot study showed that respondents have different interpretations of what they consider as
vegetables. For example, tomatoes and onions were considered spices, rather than vegetables, whereas
spinach or other leafy green vegetables were considered vegetables. Overall, this result indicates that
it is of great importance to define and categorize the term vegetables in surveys. However, it should be
taken into account that it is of great importance to tailor the applied questionnaire or instrument as
much as possible to the local perceptions and definitions of vegetables. On the other hand, in data
collection it is also of great importance that the used definition of vegetables is clearly marked. In our
study we tried to overcome this challenge, by showing a clear explanation our definition of vegetables
by including pictures of the vegetables that were seen at the open local markets and in supermarkets
and other outlets during a previous trip. Regardless of how vegetables are defined in this survey,
results indicate that vegetable consumption should be increased across all the SEC.
The limited variety of vegetable intake should be considered in interventions, especially for the
low SEC groups and at the same time might provide opportunities, for example in terms of processed
vegetables (i.e., dried vegetables). In the dry season, dried vegetables might be a good suggestion as
the availability of fresh vegetables is lower and prices are higher [17]. Moreover, future research could
focus on the specific motives to buy fresh or processed vegetables, the selection for the more traditional
or exotic ones, and the specific motives to purchase vegetables at a specific outlet (e.g., open market,
supermarket or small convenience store), this to get more insights into ways to increase variety. More
specifically, we found that richer and upper middle-class respondents consumed more vegetables and
especially more raw vegetables, a larger variety of vegetables, and more canned vegetables compared
those respondents that were in the poorer SEC groups. This indicates that there are opportunities to
132
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771
increase the intake of a more varied vegetable basket and preparing and processing methods. On the
other hand, it is unclear what the motives and barriers are behind those SEC differences. Do consumers
from lower SEC have different attitudes and beliefs, or does the availability or accessibility differs, or
both? These research questions might be of interest in future research.
When looking at the FCM, it was shown that the motives Health, Mood, Natural and Weight
control were considered the most important motives in making food choices. Ethical concern was
considered least important. The order of importance of the FCM was broadly in line with other
studies that used the original FCQ (e.g., Reference [45,46]), with the exception that the Nigerian
consumer considered the motive Familiar as more important than the European consumer (M = 5.31
versus M = 2.85) [45]. Food consumption practices in Nigeria are found to be influenced by many
social-cultural factors, including cultural traditions, food beliefs or religious circumstances [47]. Future
interventions and product design should consider Health and other motives important to consumers.
To stimulate vegetable consumption the motives Health and Mood should be integrated into an
intervention or product design as they are related to vegetable consumption. For example, the motive
Health could be further operationalized in mentioning the health benefits of vegetables.
Next, it is important to realize that the revealed eight-factor structure in this study is not in
correspondence with the nine-factor structure presented by Steptoe et al. (1995). This result is in line
with other studies in LMICs that applied the FCQ [46]. Therefore, a good comparison of the most and
least important FCM between countries and over time is not possible as the results of the CFA and
EFA differs between the original FCQ and the ones that are conducted in the developing countries.
This due to the fact that some other studies added extra items or conducted a different statistical test.
A review by Cunha et al. (2018) showed that several studies have shown the invariance of the FCQ
across cultures, while others present the need for adaptations of the FCQ [46]. Also, for Nigeria, the
original FCQ might not fit the local context. There is some research conducted on the different motives
that Nigerian consumers have. Culture, food safety/risk, healthiness and convenience are considered
important motives for selecting a certain food product [19]. Future research should focus on the validity
of the FCQ for the Nigerian context and context-specific motives might be useful to further improve the
measurement scale. For the other drivers, the results were in line with previous studies that showed
an association between self-efficacy and subjective knowledge with food intake. Increasing ability
aspect of vegetable intake seems to be a promising way to move forward. Ability should be considered
in combination with motivation and opportunity; the so-called MOA model [22]. While abilities are
the individual’s skills and/or knowledge that enable behavior change [27] and motivation represents
the individual’s willingness to change behavior; opportunity is the environmental or contextual
mechanisms that enable behavior change, and ability. Collective changes in consumer behavior can
open pathways to more sustainable food systems that enhance food security and nutrition and health.
Therefore, we discuss the implications of the results from a food systems perspective in Section 4.4.
4.3. Study Limitations
This study has limitations. First, and most importantly, vegetable consumption is based on
self-reported data. The results should be interpreted carefully, as we lack insights on how reliable
self-reported vegetable consumption is. In addition, the FFQ was used which is a valid method
to measure vegetable intake at a level where consumers can be ranked, but it is less suitable for
establishing more detailed information on intake and quantification of intake [41]. Respondents might
have over- or underreported their consumption. In developing countries consumers might be more
prone to report socially desirable aspects, rather than real behavior [41]. However, respondents also
might have underreported their vegetable consumption as a result of short memory or low educational
level. However, in this study, this is less of a problem because we only compare the different SEC [41]
and look at associations between drivers and intake while we do not draw conclusions in terms of the
actual intake. Another limitation in the interpretation of the study results was the focus on vegetables
rather than meals and preparation and the limited geographical position. Vegetables are a crucial
133
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771
part of a healthy diet and often consumption is below recommendation which justifies the focus
on vegetables. On the other hand, looking at combinations of vegetables with other food products,
and studying preparation methods will help to formulate implications of the outcomes in relation to
healthy eating patterns. Similarly, it is not feasible within the scope of the project to include the whole
country, at the same time we must be aware that the results might differ in other regions of Nigeria and
should try to gain some insights regarding the degree of these differences. Additionally, the timing of
the research in the wet season, the relatively high-income level of our sample, and the focus on urban
areas with relatively high availability of vegetables throughout the year limits the generalizability of
the results.
4.4. Food Systems—Implications and Future Direction
To be able to effectively address current nutrition challenges, research and intervention strategies
on consumer healthy eating behavior should not be considered in isolation, but in a broad setting.
Dietary behavior related to consumer purchase behavior is shaped in the context of the food
environment; food environments, in turn, are shaped by the activities of all actors in the food
system [48]. The food system approach considers all the different activities in our food systems from
production to consumption (and the relationships between them), as well as the outcomes of these
activities on a range of domains, such as food security (including nutrition), socio-economics (income,
employment) and the environment/climate (biodiversity, climate) [49]. In this way it provides good
insights into particular parts of the food system and insights into opportunities for the development of
food system interventions and effective entry points for longer-term policy [6,50]. In urban areas in
Africa, food systems rapidly transform in many ways with changes in food supply (food environment)
and food demand (consumers) [8]. Regarding the demand side, shifts in preferences, attitudes
regarding foods, income and household structures will occur [8]. Consumers are part of the system
and developed certain preferences through their knowledge, available time, resources (purchasing
power), age, sex, culture, religion, etc. These preferences provide an entry point for the different
dimensions of a food system: The food environment can be changed to influence consumer behavior
at the level of production (product characteristics such as taste), retail (nudging, logos, prices) or
governance (directly through regulations or indirectly through price and availability). In turn, changing
preferences will again influence the system and might have side-effects on other parts of the system
(e.g., environmental impact). The results of the present study provides insights into consumer behavior
that could be used to develop such kind of intervention strategies, in particular the importance of
health and convenience for vegetable consumption. The motive health is considered one of the most
important motives in making food choices. Other research conducted in Nigeria confirms that urban
Nigerians have become increasingly concerned about the amount of fat and sugar in their diet and
the adverse health effects resulting from this [19]. An example of an intervention that affected the
different dimensions within the whole food system is the Mexico sugar-sweetened beverage tax, The
tax (enabling environment) specifically targeted the food environment (affordability aspect), and
had an impact on the consumption of sugar containing beverages (food supply chain) and changed
consumer choices (consumer characteristics) [6,51]. Convenience was a main barrier for vegetable
intake in our study. Hollinger and Staatz (2015) showed that there is a growing need for convenience
foods; there is less time to buy and prepare foods [19]. In the United States research has shown that
mobile produce markets emerged as a strategy to improve vegetable access and consumption among
lower-income consumers (food supply chain and enabling environment) [52]. The results of the study
indicate that also in urban Nigeria such an intervention might possibly increase accessibility and
consumption of vegetables.
5. Conclusions
The burden of NCDs is on the rise in Nigeria. One of the major contributors to the risks of the
NCDs is poor eating habits. Current vegetable consumption is below recommendations and this study
134
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771
provides insights into drivers to increase consumption in the context of Nigeria’s burgeoning city
regions of Lagos and Ibadan. The current consumption patterns also show a low variety in terms
of vegetables types, outlets, and types of processing of vegetables. Increasing knowledge and the
belief in one’s own ability to prepare vegetables (self-efficacy) might be a way to increase vegetable
consumption, especially in combination with interventions and product design focused at the motives
Health and Mood and taking into account the importance of Price and differences between SEC. In the
design of an intervention and/or experiment it would be more beneficial to target on specific SEC
and consider that these groups differ in their vegetable consumption and purchase behavior, FCM,
and subjective knowledge. For example, for the low SEC an intervention could focus on the limited
variety of vegetable intake. This intervention should then also integrate the FCM, and other drivers
that are relevant for the vegetable intake of low SEC consumers. Another implication of the study
is that overall in Nigerian studies vegetables should be further defined as consumers have different
definitions in mind regarding vegetables. Next, the importance of FCM in food choices is well known,
however, to measure them there is a need for an FCQ that fits the local context.
Author Contributions: All authors worked on the conceptualization of the study. I.R. and H.S. analyzed the data
and wrote the paper. All the authors reviewed and edited the manuscript.
Funding: Funding has been generously provided by the Netherlands Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food
Quality (grant WUR-KB22-003-001). This work and follow-up research is performed in collaboration with the
CGIAR research program Agriculture for Nutrition and Health, flagship Food systems for healthier diets.
Acknowledgments: We thank Gemma Tacken for her contributions to the design and efforts in the project
management during the project. We thank seminar participants at IITA in 2017, and ANH Academy 2018 for their
useful feedback.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the decision to
publish the results.
References
1. United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. World Urbanization
Prospects: The 2014 Revision, Highlights (ST/ESA/SER.A/352); United Nations: San Francisco, CA, USA, 2014.
2. United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. World Population Prospects:
The 2015 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables; Working Paper No. ESA/P/WP.241; United Nations: San
Francisco, CA, USA, 2015.
3. Bloch, R.; Monroy, J.; Fox, S.; Ojo, A. Urbanisation and Urban Expansion in Nigeria; Urban Research Nigeria
(URN) Research Report; ICF International: London, UK, 2015.
4. Popkin, B.M.; Adair, L.S.; Ng, S.W. Global nutrition transition and the pandemic of obesity in developing
countries. Nutr. Rev. 2012, 70, 3–21. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Gayathri, R.; Ruchi, V.; Mohan, V. Impact of nutrition transition and resulting morbidities on economic and
human development. Curr. Diabetes Rev. 2017, 13, 452–460. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Global Panel on Agriculture and Food Systems for Nutrition. Food Systems and Diets: Facing the Challenges of
the 21st Century; Global Panel on Agriculture and Food Systems for Nutrition: London, UK, 2016.
7. Oyewole, O.E.; Atinmo, T. Nutrition transition and chronic diseases in Nigeria. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 2015, 74,
460–465. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Seto, K.C.; Ramankutty, N. Hidden linkages between urbanization and food systems. Science 2016, 352,
943–945. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Abrahams, Z.; Mchiza, Z.; Steyn, N.P. Diet and mortality rates in Sub-Saharan Africa: Stages in the nutrition
transition. BMC Public Health 2011, 11, 801. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Steyn, N.P.; Mchiza, Z.J. Obesity and the nutrition transition in Sub-Saharan Africa. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.
2014, 1311, 88–101. [CrossRef]
11. Maiyaki, M.B.; Garbati, M.A. The burden of non-communicable diseases in Nigeria; in the context of
globalization. Ann. Afr. Med. 2014, 13, 1–10. [CrossRef]
135
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771
12. Aune, D.; Giovannucci, E.; Boffetta, P.; Fadnes, L.T.; Keum, N.; Norat, T.; Greenwood, D.C.; Riboli, E.;
Vatten, L.J.; Tonstad, S. Fruit and vegetable intake and the risk of cardiovascular disease, total cancer and
all-cause mortality—A systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Int. J.
Epidemiol. 2017, 46, 1029–1056. [CrossRef]
13. Hung, H.C.; Joshipura, K.J.; Jiang, R.; Hu, F.B.; Hunter, D.; Smith-Warner, S.A.; Colditz, G.A.; Rosner, B.;
Spiegelman, D.;Willett,W.C. Fruit and vegetable intake and risk of major chronic disease. J. Natl. Cancer
Inst. 2004, 96, 1577–1584. [CrossRef]
14. Yahia, E.M. The Contribution of Fruit and Vegetable Consumption to Human Health. In Fruit and Vegetable
Phytochemicals; De La Rosa, L.A., Alvarez-Parrilla, E., González-Aguilar, G.A., Eds.; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.:
Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2017; pp. 3–51.
15. Maziya-Dixon, B. Nigeria Food Consumption and Nutrition Survey 2001–2003: Summary; International Institute
of Tropical Agriculture: Ibadan, Nigeria, 2004.
16. Chubike, N.E.; Okaka, J.; Okoli, E.C. Evaluation of vegetable consumption in South Eastern Nigeria. Int. J.
Nutr. Metab. 2013, 5, 57–60.
17. Hart, A.; Azubuike, C.; Barimalaa, I.; Achinewhu, S. Vegetable consumption pattern of households in selected
areas of the old Rivers State in Nigeria. Afr. J. Food Agric. Nutr. Dev. 2005, 5, 1–18.
18. Olatona, F.; Sosanya, A.; Sholeye, O.; Obrutu, O.; Nnoaham, K. Knowledge of fruits and vegetables,
consumption pattern and associated factors among adults in Lagos State, Nigeria. Res. J. Health Sci.
2018, 6, 50–62. [CrossRef]
19. Hollinger, F.; Staatz, J.M. Agricultural Growth in West Africa, Market and Policy Drivers; FAO: Rome, Italy, 2015.
20. Ijewere, A.A.; Odia, E.O. Cultural Influences on Product Choice of the Nigerian Consumer. Indian J. Econ. Bus.
2012, 11, 139–155.
21. Food and Agriculture Organization. Balance Sheet Nigeria 2017. Available online: http://www.fao.org/
faostat/en/#data/FBS (accessed on 13 December 2018).
22. ThØgersen, J. Understanding of consumer behaviour as a prerequisite for environmental protection.
J. Consum. Policy 1995, 18, 345–385.
23. Ajzen, I.; Fishbein, M. Understanding Attitudes and Predicting Social Behaviour; Prentice-Hall: Upper Saddle
River, NJ, USA, 1980.
24. Steptoe, A.; Pollard, T.M.;Wardle, J. Development of a measure of the motives underlying the selection of
food: The food choice questionnaire. Appetite 1995, 25, 267–284. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Konttinen, H.; Sarlio-Lähteenkorva, S.; Silventoinen, K.; Männistö, S.; Haukkala, A. Socio-economic
disparities in the consumption of vegetables, fruit and energy-dense foods: The role of motive priorities.
Public Health Nutr. 2013, 16, 873–882. [CrossRef]
26. Appleton, K.M.; Hemingway, A.; Saulais, L.; Dinnella, C.; Monteleone, E.; Depezay, L.; Morizet, D.; Armando
Perez-Cueto, F.J.; Bevan, A.; Hartwell, H. Increasing vegetable intakes: Rationale and systematic review of
published interventions. Eur. J. Nutr. 2016, 55, 869–896. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Rothschild, M.L. Carrots, sticks, and promises: A conceptual framework for the management of public
health and social issue behaviors. J. Mark. 1999, 63, 24–37. [CrossRef]
28. Cabral, D.; de Almeida, M.D.V.; Cunha, L.M. Food Choice Questionnaire in an African country–Application
and validation in Cape Verde. Food Qual. Prefer. 2017, 62, 90–95. [CrossRef]
29. Flynn, L.R.; Goldsmith, R.E. A short, reliable measure of subjective knowledge. J. Bus. Res. 1999, 46, 57–66.
[CrossRef]
30. Lagerkvist, C.J.; Hess, S.; Okello, J.; Karanja, N. Consumer willingness to pay for safer vegetables in urban
markets of a developing country: The case of Kale in Nairobi, Kenya. J. Dev. Stud. 2013, 49, 365–382.
[CrossRef]
31. Ngigi, M.; Okello, J.; Lagerkvist, C.; Karanja, N.; Mburu, J. Urban consumers’ willingness to pay for quality
of leafy vegetables along the value chain: The case of Nairobi Kale consumers, Kenya. Int. J. Bus. Soc. Sci.
2011, 2, 208–216.
32. Bandura, A. Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psychol. Rev. 1977, 84, 191–215.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Brug, J. Determinants of healthy eating: Motivation, abilities and environmental opportunities. Fam. Pract.
2008, 25, i50–i55. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
136
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4771
34. Schwarzer, R. Modeling health behavior change: How to predict and modify the adoption and maintenance
of health behaviors. Appl. Psychol. 2008, 57, 1–29. [CrossRef]
35. Galobardes, B.; Shaw, M.; Lawlor, D.A.; Lynch, J.W.; Smith, G.D. Indicators of socioeconomic position (part 1).
J. Epidemiol. Community Health 2006, 60, 7–12. [CrossRef]
36. Galobardes, B.; Shaw, M.; Lawlor, D.A.; Lynch, J.W.; Smith, G.D. Indicators of socioeconomic position (part 2).
J. Epidemiol. Community Health 2006, 60, 95–101. [CrossRef]
37. Adler, N.E.; Newman, K. Socioeconomic disparities in health: Pathways and policies. Health Aff. 2002, 21,
60–76. [CrossRef]
38. Chen, E.; Miller, G.E. Socioeconomic status and health: Mediating and moderating factors. Ann. Rev. Clin.
Psychol. 2013, 9, 723–749. [CrossRef]
39. Deshmukh-Taskar, P.; Nicklas, T.A.; Yang, S.J.; Berenson, G.S. Does food group consumption vary by
differences in socioeconomic, demographic, and lifestyle factors in young adults? The Bogalusa Heart Study.
J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 2007, 107, 223–234. [CrossRef]
40. Ares, G.; Machín, L.; Girona, A.; Curutchet, M.R.; Giménez, A. Comparison of motives underlying food
choice and barriers to healthy eating among low medium income consumers in Uruguay. Cad. Saude Publ.
2017, 33, e00213315. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41. Thompson, F.E.; Subar, A.F. Dietary Assessment Methodology. In Nutrition in the Prevention and Treatment of
Disease, 3rd ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2013; pp. 5–46.
42. Van Assema, P.; Brug, J.; Ronda, G.; Steenhuis, I.; Oenema, A. A short dutch questionnaire to measure
fruit and vegetable intake: Relative validity among adults and adolescents. Nutr. Health 2002, 16, 85–106.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Hair, J.F., Jr.; Anderson, R.E.; Tatham, R.L.; Black, W.C. Multivariate Data Analysis, 4th ed.; Prentice Hall:
London, UK, 1995.
44. Aertsens, J.; Mondelaers, K.; Verbeke, W.; Buysse, J.; Van Huylenbroeck, G. The influence of subjective
and objective knowledge on attitude, motivations and consumption of organic food. Br. Food J. 2011, 113,
1353–1378. [CrossRef]
45. Markovina, J.; Stewart-Knox, B.J.; Rankin, A.; Gibney, M.; de Almeida, M.D.V.; Fischer, A.; Kuznesof, S.A.;
Poínhos, R.; Panzone, L.; Frewer, L.J.; et al. Food4Me study: Validity and reliability of Food Choice
Questionnaire in 9 European countries. Food Qual. Prefer. 2015, 45, 26–32. [CrossRef]
46. Cunha, L.M.; Cabral, D.; Moura, A.P.; de Almeida, M.D.V. Application of the Food Choice Questionnaire
across cultures: Systematic review of cross-cultural and single country studies. Food Qual. Prefer. 2018, 64,
21–36. [CrossRef]
47. Onuorah, C.; Ayo, J. Food taboos and their nutritional implications on developing nations like Nigeria—A
review. Nutr. Food Sci. 2003, 33, 235–240. [CrossRef]
48. Meerman. Food Environments: Linking Food and Agriculture Policies to Diet Quality. Consultative Workshop on
Leveraging FAO’s Policy Mapping and Analysis Work to Promote Nutrition; Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations: Rome, Italy, 2015.
49. van Berkum, S.; Dengerink, J.; Ruben, R. The Food Systems Approach: Sustainable Solutions for a Sufficient Supply
of Healthy Food;Wageningen Economic Research: The Hague, The Netherlands, 2018.
50. Waterlander, W.E.; Mhurchu, C.N.; Eyles, H.; Vandevijvere, S.; Cleghorn, C.; Scarborough, P.; Swinburn, B.;
Seidell, J. Food futures: Developing effective food systems interventions to improve public health nutrition.
Agric. Syst. 2018, 160, 124–131. [CrossRef]
51. Colchero, M.A.; Popkin, B.M.; Rivera, J.A.; Ng, S.W. Beverage purchases from stores in Mexico under the
excise tax on sugar sweetened beverages: Observational study. BMJ 2016, 352, h6704. [CrossRef]
52. Hsiao, B.S.; Sibeko, L.; Troy, L.M. A Systematic Review of Mobile Produce Markets: Facilitators and Barriers
to Use, and Associations with Reported Fruit and Vegetable Intake. J. Acad. Nutr. Diet. 2018, in press.
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
137
sustainability
Article
Capturing Social Innovations in Agricultural
Transformation from the Field: Outcomes of
a Write-Shop
Bram Peters 1, Marion Herens 2 and Jan Brouwers 2,*
1 ICCO Cooperation Myanmar; PO Box 8190, 3503-RD Utrecht, The Netherlands; b.peters@icco.nl
2 Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation (WCDI),Wageningen University & Research (WUR);
PO Box 88, 6700-ABWageningen, The Netherlands; marion.herens@wur.nl
* Correspondence: jan.brouwers@wur.nl; Tel.: +31-613160317
Received: 26 September 2018; Accepted: 9 December 2018; Published: 12 December 2018 	

Abstract: The aim of this project was to explore the theme of social innovation for nutrition-sensitive
and sustainable agriculture, resulting in examples of improved production and consumption of
nutritious food. Social innovation refers to the generation and implementation of new ideas about
how people organize interpersonal activities, or social interactions, to meet one or more common
goals and in the process change basic routines, resources, and decision-making processes. In the
country context of Myanmar, this research aimed to capture a variety of social innovation cases
related to processes of agricultural transformation. Through the method of a collaborative case
study write-shop, Myanmar-specific social innovations were identified, illustrating various forms
of social innovation across the cases with citizen engagement processes. The write-shop method,
in combination with the embedded expertise of development practitioners, proved to be a promising
approach to identify niche innovations, distil insights, reframe actions, and promote critical thinking
among different actors.
Keywords: social innovation; agricultural commercialization; nutrition sensitive transformation; Myanmar
1. Introduction
Food systems are undergoing rapid changes in response to economic and market developments,
environmental impacts, and dietary changes [1]. Key drivers for these changes often relate to
population growth, climate change, urbanisation rates, and globalising economies. Together they create
complex changes in systems, institutions, and communities. In low- and middle-income countries,
these changes have a profound effect on poverty, livelihoods, and food and nutrition security of poor
households and smallholder farmers. In many of these countries both urban and rural households
interact with various food system typologies: notably the “modern” agro-industrial system, which is
dominated by a few global players with vertical value chains; the “traditional” food system, which is
characterised by small-scale production with short supply chains; and the “intermediate” food systems
which combine elements of the other two types. It is now seen that in Asia, for example, most consumers
interact with intermediate food systems [2].
It is expected that in the coming decades food systems will change even more, influenced by
sustainability concerns, changing consumption demands, and social challenges. In parallel, it is
becoming clearer that achieving global development goals and tackling wicked problems requires
attention to a number of interrelated themes [3]:
• The search for adequate forms of governance fitting with contemporary dynamics such as
globalisation and democratisation;
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4727; doi:10.3390/su10124727 138 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4727
• Growing understanding about the need to deal with complex adaptive systems, incorporating
elements of non-linearity, resilience, and constant change;
• Taking into account how the human mind works in response to information streams and in
decision-making processes, building on social learning processes [4];
• Exploring innovation as a key way to solve problems, generate new value and transform systems;
• Working in partnerships, building on the fact that these issues cannot be confronted by one or two
actors without the collaboration of other organisations or institutions from other parts of societies
or sectors.
In many scenarios and partnerships for the development of food systems, commercialisation
strategies for smallholder farming are seen as one of the key responses to promote and provide for
high-value agricultural products, generate incomes for farming households, and to improve linkages
between rural, urban, and global markets [5]. While it is important to explore how smallholders can
better participate in existing food system arrangements, it can be argued that deeper or transitional
approaches are needed to tackle the themes mentioned above. It is perhaps not enough to only include,
but to also empower citizens to change institutions and mental models for better, and sometimes
unexpected, outcomes. Thus, in other scenarios, innovation of social, economic, and environmental
relationships within food systems is deemed crucial to tackle these challenges and provide sustainable
and inclusive transformation. The emerging field of social innovation, drawing from innovation,
resilience, social entrepreneurship, and organisational change thinking, seeks to understand how
individuals, organisations, and networks can generate new solutions for multiple societal goals [6] or
build resilience through transitions [7]. Social innovation departs from the starting point that societal
and systemic innovation requires techware (technical elements), software (social/people aspect),
and orgware (the institutional organisation and setup). Lasting innovation also or at least partially
includes social innovation, combined with technical and institutional innovation. Many innovations
did not make it and failed as they underestimated the social component.
Since the 2011 reforms, widespread changes are taking place in Myanmar. In addition to political
liberalization, the country has gone through a process of post-socialist economic transition. In economicinstitutional
terms, Myanmar has been undergoing transformation from a centrally-planned, statecommanded
socialist economy, to an open, market-based capitalist economy. The rapid transformation
and fragile shift from the political dominance of the military has brought consequences of an
unprecedented magnitude. The international community, international organizations, and foreign
investors have reengaged in projects with Myanmar, and a new social dynamism is being established,
including deeper engagement with globalization. The political reforms implemented over the last
years have triggered changes in all parts of the country. It is not clear, however, whether these changes
will continue, and how these changes will impact on diverse social groups and across the national
space [8].
The research presented here was conducted throughout 2017 as part ofWageningen University and
Research programs on Global Food and Nutrition Security and Social Innovation for Value Creation.
The goal was to explore the theme of social innovation for the identification of nutrition-sensitive
and sustainable agricultural development pathways. Applied to the context of Myanmar, this paper
presents the projects’ explorative approach and methodology to identify social innovation cases in
agricultural development and food and nutrition security programs and initiatives. These cases
represent innovative niches that test and refine new arrangements or techniques within the agricultural
sector. Innovation scholars in socio-technical transitions have discussed the importance of creating
innovative niches, which are understood as safe spaces within an organisation or network. They can
also serve as the root of a new organisation [7].
By using the lens of social innovation (SI) and by using write-shop methodology the goal was
two-fold: (1) bring together four emergent Myanmar cases related to social innovation, agriculture,
and food and nutrition security with a focus on the consumption of nutritious food (Cases 1.0) and
turn these into concrete, shareable products (Cases 2.0); and (2) learn from each other’s approaches
139
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4727
and experiences and utilise the complementary capacities to generate useful principles and insights
in relation to SI. In this way, the Myanmar cases contributed to the following research questions,
which were identified at the start of the research program:
- What are critical drivers of food choices for farmer households?
- How can farm households manage risks related to climate and market changes?
- What farm household strategies support nutrition sensitive agricultural pathways in
commercializing agricultural contexts?
Theoretical Orientation
What Is Social Innovation?
Different types of definitions of SI have generated two main schools of thinking in SI [9].
The first school focuses on new social processes. This relates to exploring changes in social relations,
and emphasising changing power balances towards economic equity in society. A definition byWestley
and Antadze [10] suggests that “social innovation is a complex process of introducing new products,
processes or programs that profoundly change the basic routines, resources and authority flows, or
beliefs of the social system in which the innovation occurs. Such successful social innovations have
durability and broad impact”. Accordingly, authors like Mumford state that social innovation entails
complex processes introducing new products, processes or programs that profoundly change the basic
routines, resources, and decision-making processes, or beliefs of the system in which the innovation
occurs [11]. The second school emphasises understanding of new social outputs and outcomes, and is
primarily oriented toward dealing with market failures in the provision of public social goods. In line
with this second school the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) [12]
states that: “Social innovation is distinct from economic innovation because it is not about introducing
new types of production or exploiting new markets in itself but is about satisfying new needs not
provided by the market (even if markets intervene later) or creating new, more satisfactory ways of
insertion in terms of giving people a place and a role in production”. It has to be noted that not all
social innovation is positive as dominant actors may influence the innovation process.
How to Make SI More Concrete?
The difficulty with approaching social innovation is that it is not clearly defined as a concept,
and is often both invoked from a strongly actor-oriented, agency perspective on the one hand, but also
from a structuralist systems perspective on the other. This is because innovations can be seen to come
from individuals, but also from combinations and causal chains of results from external contexts [13].
Scholars attempting to distinguish between agency and structural innovation thinking have identified
various levels: innovation of goods and services, institutional innovation geared to reorganising social
and economic structures, and system change or radical innovation [14].
It is important to note that these dimensions do not have to suggest yet whether or not these
innovations are successful. It rather focuses on the vision of change aimed for. As noted above, SI is
not necessarily a good thing, even though the two main definitions seem to suggest this. It can be the
case that SI leads to consequences that are beneficial for some while leading to disadvantages and
negative effects for others. This can take the form of secret societies and shadow states; unintended
consequences that eventually do more harm than good; and that it can fail in its implementation or
used for different goals than was intended by other actors in society. It is important to realise this
because in SI discussions it is sometimes assumed that win-win and beneficial outcomes are the key
elements of SI [9]. Amongst the drivers for SI the need to address so-called wicked problems affecting
global societies is central: climate change, growing inequality, demographic transitions, migration,
and terrorism among the most important ones. In parallel, the changing of the way society is organised
socio-politically may compound these problems: growing nationalism, public sector austerity, financial
market complexity, private sector market failures, etc. This has affected all of the traditional spheres of
society (public, private, and civil society) [9].
140
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4727
In dealing with the question of who is to deliver public welfare, SI has increasingly taken shape
in the form of new partnership models in which public, private, and civil society actors collaborate
or become hybrid actors. This is seen to have the potential to increase effectiveness of services and
improve performance of control and choice, leads to new stakeholder role divisions and responsibilities,
and new ways of co-creation and citizen engagement. New hybrid actors, as sites of social innovation,
start to exist at the interface of private/public and civil society sectors. These can take up the ideal-type
form of public–private entities, shadow state, and social enterprise, while there is a spectrum of
different types of organisations existing between the different sector types [14].
The shifting or rather the blurring of boundaries between actors and organisations from different
parts of society is often happening in response to challenges, risks, opportunities, and new mental
models that encourage organisations to step out of their traditional role. Businesses seek to find new
ways for creating “shared value” and for corporate social responsibility. Civil society actors seek to
become more efficient, and realise more sustainable and durable outcomes of their projects by involving
more business-like engagement models. Public institutions respond to new public governance trends,
incorporating the modernisation and digitalisation of the public sector [9].
Why is SI Relevant for Agricultural Development Pathways for Food and Nutrition Security?
In the field of agriculture and food and nutrition security different forms and cases of SI can
be highlighted:
• Processes of resilience and adaptation in production of food;
• Inclusive participation and new roles for stakeholders;
• Community-led organisations and bottom-up initiatives;
• Different interpretations and usages of technologies;
• New kinds of agro-food partnerships;
• Citizen science initiatives.
Various social innovations in this sphere have been captured in the past in Asia. In India,
the System of Rice Intensification (SRI) as described by Prasad [15] is one such example. In this
case, a combination of factors such as the historical influence of Gandhi’s independence teachings
to search for alternative narratives, availability of community spaces for exchanging indigenous
knowledge, a deep crisis in farmer agency (high productivity rates but low profits leading to a high
percentage of farmer suicides), and a heavy emphasis on green revolution technologies led to a
counter-response that did not involve genetic modification. The idea was that SRI involves managing
rice plants, soil, water, and nutrients with reduced use of material inputs while creating productive
and resilient varieties in a collaborative manner. These approaches were tested in collaborations
between researchers, civil society organisations, and farmers. While initially meeting with heavy
resistance from agricultural research and extension institutes, eventually SRI became an accepted body
of knowledge on crop intensification and helped to foster diversity in thinking and renewed valuation
of local experimentation and community engagement [15].
A second example piloted in South East Asia refers to “Farmer Field Schools”. Piloted by the
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation since the early 90s. Farmer Field Schools were
developed as an approach countering top-down Green Revolution extension methods in places where
complex or contradictory problems challenged farmers. The premise of putting farmer peer-to-peer
learning and group experimentation ahead of technical knowledge constituted a new approach to
farmer capacity development. This approach allowed farmers to investigate, test, and decide for
themselves what production methods worked for their environment [16].
In another example, food system researchers have signalled movements that are increasingly
calling for “reversed food chain thinking”: reshaping relations to follow consumer demand rather than
production push or market pull. In these perspectives, the end-consumer is the final judge of food
systems. Such an innovation would reorient food chains to food acceptability, safety, health, and use
141
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4727
of (nutritious) food. For researchers and value chain actors, such dynamics require a more holistic
approach to supply chain problems.
In this research, the theme of “social innovation” for nutrition-sensitive and sustainable agriculture
for improved production and consumption of nutritious food in Myanmar is of particular interest.
The recent process of opening up to the global economic system, ongoing processes of democratisation
in Myanmar, combined with a growing commercialisation in agriculture, represents an interesting
setting to explore emergent forms of social innovation [17].
2. Materials and Methods
An SI write-shop was organized in Myanmar. Write-shop methodology [18,19] was applied on
four cases that explore and illustrate social innovations in Myanmar. Write-shop methodology focuses
on documentation of key findings and lessons learned from practitioners and experts. The challenges
posed by the limited uptake of exemplary practices, and the reality that useful knowledge often
remained in the mind of field workers or in unpublished documents, prompted the discovery
and testing of write-shop approaches [19]. The objective of write-shops is to help make available
“hidden” field knowledge and make voices from the field become part of global dialogues on
development.With the help of facilitators and editors field knowledge was put on paper (or on another
communication medium for that matter). The write-shop method is particularly useful for really sitting
down with colleagues and peers, take stock of practice, draw lessons, and work practically on a product
that can be used after the workshop. A key driver for organisations to engage in write-shops is the
need to document insights and produce shareable and easily consumable materials on certain issues
deemed important. Often field practitioners face a situation where information is scattered or not easily
understandable even though it could be very relevant to them. Another situation might be that a group
of field practitioners has discovered solutions to pressing problems, but do not have the time or skills
to capture them fully. In these situations, the departure points are often that information is largely in
people’s heads; no single person is the expert or has the overview; information is drawn from a broad
repository of data; and the information needs to be validated with others [19]. Capturing emergent
niche experiments that have the potential to result into sustainable innovation has a focus on reflection
and articulating emergent understanding as a learning process. Likewise, the SI niche experiments
described in this article all seek to develop sustainable solutions in practice, while integrating social
and economic issues [20].
Write-shops generally take the following steps [19]:
• First draft presentation;
• Participants criticise the draft, offer comments, and suggest illustrations;
• Draft re-written and edited;
• Drafts are again reviewed and adapted;
• Final products are developed.
The process of repeated presentations, critiquing, and revising of drafts allows for papers or
other products to be reviewed and sharpened substantially, development of new topics, and for topics
to be combined, dropped or split into parts. The Myanmar write-shop took place over a two-day
workshop in October 2017 (see Figure 1). Key findings and lessons on SI, presented by practitioners,
were documented in a workshop report [21].
Four Yangon-based organisations engaged in agricultural innovation were selected to participate
based on purposive sampling. The write-shop process started with a participant instruction, prior to
the event, to prepare a case for the workshop (bringing pictures, documents, video images, etc.) and to
reflect on the kind of desired end-product. In the two-day setup, participants first orally presented
their cases on social innovation, followed by a session of questioning, deepening, and critical review.
142
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4727
Figure 1. Process followed during the two-day social innovation workshop.
Based on this, a first draft was composed for all four cases, followed by a second round of review
and feedback. Draft products were revised, and new topics were developed or combined, or topics
dropped. Inputs from all participants were incorporated, taking advantage of the diverse experience
and expertise of people present. The cases together formed the basis of the building blocks (or themes)
capturing the current processes of SI in Myanmar.
The example of Farmer Field Schools was shared as a social innovation example that started in
the 90s and is now institutionalised in various SE Asia countries [16]. This methodology emerged in
response to the Green Revolution and the idea that farmers should also have the chance to share and
give their opinions and best practices. By letting farmers test and choose key practices and letting them
compare between different farming approaches a new way of supporting technology and knowledge
uptake was facilitated. After the introduction, participants together translated the concept of SI
into Myanmar language and back to English, which provided a more detailed and contextualised
understanding of the SI concept.
During an initial scoping visit to Myanmar in January 2017, the team members ofWageningen
University & Research had the opportunity to meet with a number of organisations working from
diverse angles and expertise on agricultural transformation and food and nutrition security. Some of
these organisations showed potential in terms of projects and initiatives that touched upon the
abovementioned key concepts of social innovation. Four organisations active in Myanmar brought
forward a social innovation case: Fresh Studio, Greenway, Myanmar Heart Development Organisation
(MHDO), and Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation (WCDI). The four Myanmar SI cases
are presented below:
1. Fresh Studio implements the Sustainable and Affordable Poultry for All (SAPA) program
in Myanmar. The SAPA program aims at improving the food security and rural incomes of
smallholder poultry and maize farmers in Myanmar through a public–private partnership with
Dutch, Belgium, and Myanmar parties. One of the key problems SAPA is addressing is the
low agriculture productivity in Myanmar in general, and in maize and poultry production
specifically. Low agriculture productivity results in low rural incomes and relatively expensive
food. With 25 to 50% of rural inhabitants being landless, and often without sufficient income to
obtain food, it is crucial that a thriving agri-business sector is developed to generate jobs and
lower the cost price of food. The project goals are to improve food security and rural incomes of
smallholders in Myanmar, through the introduction of more productive and sustainable poultry
and maize farming practices. This will result in lower cost prices and productivity gains, making
poultry more affordable, and as the major source of animal protein in Myanmar, contribute to
food security.
143
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4727
2. Greenovator is a social enterprise launched on 1 May 2011 in Yangon, Myanmar. It was founded
by three core members who graduated from the Yezin Agricultural University. The vision of
Greenovator is to share online agricultural techniques and information with farmers and to help
them improve their agricultural practices and income levels. A key part of the work is the Green
Way mobile application. This app serves the information needs of the farming communities
by giving access to practical information. Key features include farming practice information;
weather forecasts; daily news; Q&A; and daily crop market prices. The Greenovator team actively
tries to improve their engagement with farmers and their daily realities, including sharing of
practical expertise from farmers themselves.
3. The Myanmar Heart Development Organisation (MHDO) is a Myanmar civil society
organisation founded in 2006 to create and provide opportunities for improved livelihoods
for the needy in Myanmar. The organisational activities include food for education, food for
work, food for training and non-food items, and cash for work. The organisation also implements
agriculture-related interventions such as integrated farming, livestock rearing, and organic
farming techniques. Key areas where the organisation works include Northern Shan State,
Magway Region, and Rakhine State. Notably the work conducted in Northern Rakhine State,
which was highly unstable and conflict-stricken at the time of the workshop, meant that the
organisation had to be very sensitive and adaptive in their balancing of humanitarian and
development work. The MHDO case focused on how to best combine activities that contribute to
food and nutrition security. One of the methods used was the “Five Colours” approach to teach
villagers about nutritional values of fruits and vegetables: each colour represents a different type
of nutritious food. Another part of the work is on agricultural development through support in
making organic fertilizer.
4. Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation researchers generated insights into SI
examples in Myanmar during a case study [17,21]. For this write-shop, one village was selected
to highlight a number of activities and strategies that could signal the development of socially
innovative strategies. In one community in the Pakokku research area (Magway State), interesting
activities and dynamics were taking place. In this community forms of strong social cohesion were
identified, under the guidance of community leaders, which translated into various economic
and social opportunities and goals. Firstly, the community farmers were organising themselves
gradually to bypass the role of wholesalers and brokers by collecting their produce together
and hiring a truck to bring it to the market themselves. Secondly, it was also seen that, through
the support of a non-governmental organisation (NGO), community members had combined a
traditional oilseed mortar and pestle with a modern fuel-driven engine to make groundnut oil
themselves. This enabled the community to make good-quality oil (free of contaminants they
perceived other oil products from the market to have) and at the same time provide a service
accessible to the whole community. The third example identified other activities such as collective
labour to rebuild dams and water containers, and a strong willingness to participate in, and share
the knowledge from trainings given by NGOs, universities, and businesses.
In the write-shop each organisation developed their own needed product and in the process
contributed to general learning and insights on SI. In this way, the four participating organisations
worked on their case and produced their respective product, while also contributing with insights on
SI processes in Myanmar.
3. Insights and Results of the Write-Shop
3.1. Findings and Results Per Case
Fresh Studio—During the write-shop Fresh Studio developed a case study document that
highlighted elements of social innovation in their work and practices. This was based on their own
poster presentation (Case 1.0) and the SAPA program document, but also their experiences from the
144
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4727
past year and a half implementing the program. Based on the iterative feedback process provided in the
write-shop, the elements of SI that came forward from the case were the approach of short-cutting the
value chains of maize and poultry by more strongly connecting consumers of safe chicken to farmers
producing broiler chicken and farmers providing maize for these chickens. Providing a “Myanmar
consumer” and a ”quality” perspective to food is quite new for Myanmar. It was also noted in the
write-shop that whereas there is a technical component to understanding and working with this,
there is also a cultural element that is important to pay attention to. Fresh Studio can build on the
idea to strengthen the partnership further as it works on this social component. Another key element
that was interesting to develop from an SI point of view was the fact that many different types of
stakeholders are working together in this Public Private Partnership (PPP). This is a new form of
collaboration in Myanmar and has the potential to create opportunities and synergies not considered
before. The write-shop resulted in a draft text for a brochure highlighting the SI elements of the
SAPA program.
Greenovator—Greenovator wanted to make use of the write-shop to develop a storyboard for
a documentary they were planning to make to promote the use of the app. Myanmar farmers often
do not have access to agricultural extension and information services—a key systemic problem
in the Myanmar food system. The basis of the storyboard idea was to introduce a few farmers
who stated that they had really benefited from using the Greenway application. The challenge
for the Greenovator group was to identify the elements that make the mobile application a social
innovation and to visualize this in a documentary. Going over the exercise of developing a storyboard
for a short video or documentary was valuable for the Greenovator team. They experienced that
developing a documentary storyboard was not easy, and that the difference between a documentary
and a promotional video is not only about the length of the video. The team was challenged to
exactly pinpoint wat makes the Greenway application different from other agricultural extension
training interventions. These elements, showing the SI potential, had to do with the communication
flows between farmers, experts and value chain actors, and the potential for exchanging different
forms of knowledge. The write-shop resulted in a storyboard providing a detailed visualized
outline of a documentary. If Greenovator is able to make the bridge between expert knowledge
and farmer/community practice and traditions, changing the roles of these groups in the process,
it can create interesting added value in the Myanmar food system.
Myanmar Heart Development Organisation —During the write-shop MHDO wanted to work
on a picture book that illustrated their approach to creating more awareness about food security and
nutrition in communities in Northern Rakhine State. Using the inspiration from the Five Colours
approach to highlight the nutritious value of products like vegetables and fruits, they drew characters
and developed a storyline that tried to tap into the knowledge they already had from the region,
the adaptive capacities of communities, and insights on nutrition. In the picture book, the MHDO
developed the story of how a development worker arrived in a community in Northern Rakhine
and met a community leader. They started talking about good food, healthy food, and nutritious
food. The development worker had ideas about what that meant, and the community leader as well.
They decided to work on food and nutrition security together, inspired by the Five Colours approach,
but also building on the communities’ resilience and local agro-ecological circumstances.
Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation—During the write-shop WCDI intended to
develop a technical brief highlighting different forms of social innovation identified at the village level.
The working title of the case (Case 1.0) was “Kan Zauk, the Prize-Winning Village”. The “Prize-Winning
Village” concept showed that combining life-course research methodologies with ideas of change in the
community could lead to interesting perspectives on social innovation. In the process of developing
a Case 2.0, it became clear that though there was quite some interesting information already there,
more data needed to be collected to make it into a solid case study. The key message that this story
brought was about inspiration and awareness of basic elements and processes of social innovations
happening in Myanmar villages. These do not necessarily occur in only this village, but probably in
145
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4727
many communities across Myanmar. The activities mentioned, such as the community oil pressing
mill, the collective truck or the new partnerships with research and businesses may not seem very
inventive from a general development perspective, but in Myanmar these are new opportunities
and ideas arising through bottom-up initiatives. For policy-makers this is essential to know about
and support.
3.2. Overall Synthesis of Social Innovations Contributing to Nutrition Sensitive Agricultural Transformation
The four cases from Myanmar illustrate how the food system is undergoing a rapid transition,
in which existing supply chains are adapting to economic, environmental, market, and dietary change.
A synthesis of the findings is presented in Table 1. The table presents a matrix with the different cases
and how they illustrate social innovation processes linking agriculture with food and nutrition security
(as introduced in Theoretical Introduction):
• Processes of enhancing resilience and adaptation in production of food;
• Inclusive participation and new roles for stakeholders;
• Community-led organisations and bottom-up initiatives;
• Different interpretations and usages of technologies;
• New kinds of agri-food partnerships; and
• Citizen science initiatives.
From the engagement in the process of the write-shop it became clear that quite a few dimensions
and key elements of SI are apparent in the work of these organisations. In various ways that is already
a good contribution being made to development, but the main added value that is in some ways
surprising relates to the fact that (1) these organisations are coming from different angles and interests,
yet (unconsciously perhaps) are applying the seeds of SI; and (2) that using a write-shop approach
has the potential to bring out these somewhat intangible contributions. Considering this, it became
apparent that the two-day setup was perhaps not enough to fully bring out the potential in SI thinking.
To capture intangible contributions at least a three-day event seems necessary.
The cases all show examples of the application of new tools and practices that allowed farmers,
development practitioners, researchers, and other actors present in the event to understand how
small-scale producers respond to a growing process of commercialisation. They also show how
individual farmers as well as farmer groups shift from a highly subsistence-oriented production
towards more specialised production targeting markets both for their input procurement and output
supply. Being flexible and having a diversified livelihood status showed to be a successful strategy
applied by farmers to deal with their challenging environment. The cases show how new forms
of inclusive community-led organisations are taking root, often in connection with the process of
democratisation. However, these social innovation initiatives face the risk of remaining isolated and
could miss the opportunity to successfully scale out in Myanmar. These types of bottom-up initiatives
can inspire policy-makers, profit and non-profit organizations, and other civil society movements
in finding better solutions with respect to the current challenges of Myanmar regarding agricultural
development and food and nutrition security.
146
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4727
Table 1. Overview of social innovation (SI) elements within cases.
Organisation SI Initiative Elements of Social Innovation
Processes of
resilience and
adaptation in
production
Participation/new
partnerships/roles
Communityled/
bottom-up
Different
interpretations/use
technologies
Citizen
science
Fresh Studio
Sustainable and Affordable
Poultry for All (SAPA)
program
- Aim: improving food & nutrition security and incomes of
smallholder poultry and maize farmers
- Builds on linking two value chains (maize and poultry)
- Seeks to connect consumers to farmers producing broiler
chicken and the farmers producing the chicken feed (maize)
√ √ √
Greenovator
Greenway App
- Initiated by alumni from agricultural university
- Aim: share alternative agricultural techniques with farmers to
help them improve their agricultural outputs and
income levels
- Seeks to actively engage with the lived realities of farmers and
find ways to draw from their practical expertise
√ √ √ √
Myanmar Heart
Development Foundation
Community action for food
and nutrition security
- Aim: creating awareness about food security and nutrition in
communities in Northern Rakhine State
- Example used was the “Five Colours” approach
- Seeks to actively build on joint sense making and give
meaning to food and nutrition security concerns with
community leaders and to translate those into action.
√ √ √ √
Wageningen Centre for
Dev. Innovation
Life course perspective
study
- Prize winning village concept
- Seeks to identify concrete examples of SI
- Seeks to make explicit that using life-course research
methodologies are relevant for identifying significant
transformations in households and community
√ √ √ √
147
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4727
3.3. Added Value of the Research and Lessons Learnt
The added value of the present research lies in providing documented material on four social
innovation cases as well as a methodology for how this can be done elsewhere. Complexity science
points to the importance that scientists understand more about the dynamics of innovation, including
the interaction between techware (technical elements), software (social/people aspect), and orgware
(the institutional organisation and setup). Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI) points to the
importance of trans-disciplinary research and stronger understanding of how civil society can be
involved in societal change processes. The present research shows how these types of social initiatives
can be identified, understood, documented, and supported, also by researchers. Societal added value
for Myanmar and similar emergent economies is provided by showing how innovation processes in the
context as described can be more successful by understanding and building on the social component
of innovation.
The following lessons can be learnt from the social innovation write-shop in Myanmar:
• In order to be effective, interventions and policies aiming at promoting sustainable food systems
have to include smallholder-farmer households’ interests on agricultural production and food
and nutrition security;
• Local understandings of diets and perspectives on food provide insights on possible entry points
for nutritional sensitive agriculture;
• The cases show the importance for policies and interventions to be informed by participatory
and holistic baseline assessment where the change perspective and visions of all the relevant
stakeholders are taken into account;
• The cases show emergent new social-technical arrangements within the Myanmar food system.
Whether they will achieve true change and institutionalise new socio-technical arrangements at
scale will depend on further introduction and linkages with actors in the existing regime.
4. Discussion
This research showed how a structured and participative exchange and reflection process as
followed in a write-shop can allow to articulate and document how farmers and their partners
respond to commercialisation processes in Myanmar. The cases illustrate elements from the emergent
intermediate food system in Myanmar, based on interactions between key actors like farmers and
small businesses, government, and international businesses. The SAPA program showed a case where
the poultry and maize value chains become more connected through PPP linkages, a new type of
partnership for Myanmar. Greenovator introduced a new app on agriculture-related information,
diminishing dependency of farmers on the rather weak present extension system. In rural parts of
Myanmar MHDO is increasing awareness on nutritious food and builds on communities’ resilience
and the local agro-ecological context for stronger food and nutrition security. The WCDI case illustrated
the social innovation dynamics at the village level and how policy-makers can support bottom-up
initiatives and accelerate local development. The cases helped to bring to the surface valuable learning
for participants and researchers, helping participants to articulate their own practice as well as to
understand other SI experiences in a similar context. The study applied write-shop methodology
and underscored its importance and potential to help make transformative processes concrete and
documented. Write-shop methodology connects with a wide range of techniques and literature on
strengthening reflection as part of action research and reflexive monitoring. Caution has to be made,
however, in allowing sufficient time in preparing and conducting the event. These types of reflexive
and documenting events merit more follow-up support, which was not part of the present research.
Before further responsible scaling can be considered and designed, case owners will need to engage
with current actors in the Myanmar food system. This process will probably result in further re-design
of potential cases with validation and empirical justification before scaling can take place, whereas
other cases might not be going to a next stage of development.
148
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4727
Supplementary Materials: The report of the write-shop is available at http://edepot.wur.nl/432091.
Author Contributions: The first two authors organized and conducted the write-shop in Myanmar. The third
author contributed with methodological design and integration with social innovation research.
Funding: This research was funded by The Netherlands Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality,
Knowledge Base Research Funds 22 and 28.
Acknowledgments: We acknowledge the support of the Dutch Embassy and our colleague Jan Verhagen in
allowing us to be introduced with potentially interested contacts in Myanmar. We are also thankful for four
anonymous reviewers. Their comments and suggestions allowed to make considerable improvements in the first
and second drafts. We are also grateful for the comments and suggestions provided by the Academic Editor and
the editing MDPI team. Processing their comments and suggestions has considerably strengthened the article.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the decision to
publish the results. All draft material of cases are available on request with the authors and have been shared
with the participants of the workshop.
References
1. HLPE. Food Losses and Waste in the Context of Sustainable Food Systems. Available online: www.fao.org/
3/a-i3901e.pd (accessed on 12 September 2018).
2. Fresco, L.O.; Ruben, R.; Herens, M. Challenges and perspectives for supporting sustainable and inclusive
food systems. GREAT Insights Mag. 2017. Available online: http://ecdpm.org/great-insights/sustainable-f
ood-systems/challenges-perspectives-sustainable-inclusive-food-systems/ (accessed on 12 september 2018).
3. Brouwer, H.; Woodhill, J.; Hemmati, M.; Verhoosel, K.; van Vugt, S. The MSP Guide: How to Design and
Facilitate Multi-Stakeholder Partnerships; Brouwer, H.,Woodhill, J., Eds.;Wageningen University—Centre for
Development Innovation: Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2015.
4. World Bank. World Development Report 2015: Mind, Society, and Behavior; World Bank: Washington, DC,
USA, 2015.
5. Westhoek, H.; van Berkum, S.; Özay, L.; Hajer, M. Food Systems and Natural Resources; United Nations
Environment Programme: Paris, France, 2016.
6. Olsson, P.; Moore, M.-L.;Westley, F.R.; McCarthy, D.D.P. The concept of the Anthropocene as a game-changer.
Ecol. Soc. 2017. [CrossRef]
7. Westley, F.; McGowan, K.; Tjörnbo, O. The Evolution of Social Innovation. Building Resilience through Transitions;
Elgar Publications: Cheltenham, UK, 2017.
8. ADB. Asian Development Bank 2014: Myanmar Unlocking the Potential. Country Diagnostic Study; ADB
Economics and Research Department: Mandaluyong, Philippines, 2014.
9. Nicholls, A.; Simon, J.; Gabriel, M. New Frontiers in Social Innovation Research; Nicholls, A., Simon, J.,
Gabriel, M., Eds.; Palgrave Macmillan: London, UK, 2015.
10. Westley, F.; Antadze, N. Making a difference: Strategies for scaling social innovation for greater impact.
Innov. J. 2010, 15, 1–19.
11. Mumford, M.D. Social Innovation: Ten Cases from Benjamin Franklin. Creativity Res. J. 2002, 14, 253–266.
[CrossRef]
12. OECD. The OECD Innovation Strategy. Getting a Head Start on Tomorrow; OECD: Paris, France, 2010.
13. Howaldt, H.; Kopp, R.; Schwarz, M. On the Theory of Social Innovations: Tarde’s Neglected Contribution to the
Development of a Sociological Innovation Theory; Beltz Juventa: Weinheim, Germany, 2015.
14. Nicholls, A.; Murdock, A. Social Innovation: Blurring Boundaries to Reconfigure Markets; Nicholls, A.,
Murdock, A., Eds.; Palgrave Macmillan: London, UK, 2012.
15. Prasad, S.C. Innovating at the margins: The System of Rice Intensification in India and transformative social
innovation. Ecol. Soc. 2016. [CrossRef]
16. FAO. Building Resilient Agricultural Systems through Farmer Field Schools; FAO: Rome, Italy, 2015.
17. Gabrielli, M.; Herens, M.; Peters, B. Farmers’ Tales: Adaptive Strategies for Agricultural Commercialisation and
Food and Nutrition Security in Myanmar; Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation: Wageningen,
The Netherlands, 2017.
149
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4727
18. Gonsalves, J.; Armonia, R. (Eds.) Writeshops: A Tool for Packaging and Sharing Fieldbased Experiences (A Guide to
Organizing Workshops); International Institute of Rural Reconstruction, International Potato Center—Users’
Perspective with Agricultural Research and Development: Manila, Philippines, 2010.
19. Mundy, P.; Mathias, E.; Bekalo, I. Out of heads and onto paper. LEISA Mag. 2006, 22, 26–28.
20. Regeer, B.J.; de Wildt-Liesveld, R.; van Mierlo, B.; Bunders, J.F.G. Reconciling accountability and learning in
the evaluation of niche experiments. Evaluation 2016, 22, 6–28. [CrossRef]
21. Herens, M.; Peters, B. Report: Social Innovation Case Study Write-Shop. Unpublished Report. 2017.
Available online: http://edepot.wur.nl/432091 (accessed on 10 September 2018).
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
150
sustainability
Article
Farmers’ Adaptive Strategies in Balancing
Commercial Farming and Consumption of
Nutritious Foods: Case Study of Myanmar
Marion Herens 1,*, Monica Gabrielli 1, Bram Peters 2, Jan Brouwers 1 and Diane Bosch 1
1 Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation, Droevendaalsesteeg 1, PO Box 88, 6700 ABWageningen,
The Netherlands; monicagabrielli1@gmail.com (M.G.); jan.brouwers@wur.nl (J.B.);
diane.bosch@wur.nl (D.B.)
2 Myanmar ICCO Cooperation, Royal White Elephant Hotel, 8th floor, 11 Kan Street, 10 Quarter,
Hlaing Township, Yangon 11051, Myanmar; b.peters@icco.nl
* Correspondence: marion.herens@wur.nl; Tel.: +31-6-2336-9354
Received: 27 September 2018; Accepted: 5 December 2018; Published: 11 December 2018 	

Abstract: Food systems undergo rapid changes in response to economic and market forces, and
environmental and dietary changes. This study aimed to disentangle adaptation strategies in
farm households balancing interests in the commercial aspects of farming and the consumption
of nutritious foods. The area of interest was Central Myanmar, Pakokku region. A literature-based
framework was used to identify entry points for adaptation strategies at the farm household level.
A purposive sampling strategy was used to select smallholders (<5 acres), engaged in market-oriented
agriculture (≥10 years). In 14 households, in-depth interviews were conducted, using a life course
perspective depicting the household history in relation to agricultural developments and household
food and nutrition security. The narratives of smallholders confirmed that household food and
nutrition security was grounded in mixed livelihood strategies, including migration. Diet quality
depended largely on income. Supportive strategies were a frugal lifestyle, responsible use of resources,
participation in community activities, and different forms of social innovation. The study shows how
the understanding of local diets provides insights in entry points for nutrition-sensitive agriculture,
and suggests a need for alternative adaptation strategies, replacing those promoting specialization
and intensification, for more holistic solutions that reinforce the flexibility and resilience of farmers.
Keywords: Agricultural commercialization; food and nutrition security; salutogenesis; life course
perspective; food systems; multi-level; positive deviance; Myanmar
1. Introduction: Food System Transitions and the Case of Myanmar
With the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) of ‘Zero Hunger’ [1], much importance has been
given to the role of nutrition in reaching the end of hunger for all by 2030. In the past, increasing food
production has been the emphasis of agricultural strategies all over the world. However, worldwide,
food systems are undergoing a rapid transition, in which existing supply chains are adapting to
economic, environmental, market, and dietary change. There is an on-going shift from local food
systems characterized by small-scale production by a large group of small holders to a growth of
commercial agriculture by fewer, larger farmers and longer and more complex global supply chains [2].
Individual farmers are increasingly involved in processes of commercialization with substantial
improvements in agricultural outputs [3], and play a crucial role in a food system as both producers
and consumers [4]. However, commercialization of agriculture can have several adverse effects,
especially in terms of equity and environmental consequences. With the increase of mechanization,
a consistent part of the rural labor force needs to be relocated in the industrial and service sector,
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721; doi:10.3390/su10124721 151 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
with consequent loss of human and social capital, as well as environmental consequences due to the
increased use of agricultural chemicals [5,6]. Where property rights are unclear, phenomena, such as
land grabbing, can take place. Also, commercialization may lead to a decline in crop diversity for
households [7]. In some cases, farmers that invested in cash crops were worse off in terms of nutritional
status than subsistence farmers [8]. The persistence of malnutrition (undernutrition, micronutrient
deficiencies) in low- and middle-income countries, alongside a worldwide growth in the prevalence
of obesity, urges us to further investigate how to simultaneously stimulate individuals’ healthy food
production as well as consumption [9].
To explore the process and impact of major, and often irreversible, food system transformations,
the case of Myanmar is an appropriate context. After 50 years of military rule, a civilian government
was installed in 2011, and the first elections were held in November 2015 [10]. Therefore, the country
was opened up to the world, allocating large concessions to foreign agribusiness companies [11].
The government expressed its intention to become a full member of the ASEAN (Association of South
East Asia Nations) community and more relaxed regulation favored foreign investment. Nevertheless,
the key strategies for the government to achieve national food security remained in rice production and
local and international agribusiness prioritization [11]. The country faces the contradictory situation of
being a net food exporter on the one hand, but experiencing high poverty and malnutrition rates on
the other [12]. A major constraint in this regard is access to land: Nearly half of the rural households
are officially reported as landless (no ownership). Confiscation of land and conflicts in some areas are
two major reasons for landlessness [13]. Until recently, farmers’ unions and networks were banned in
the country [14]. Even though the interest in nutrition security is on the rise at the policy level, there is
still a limited interconnection with the commercialization of agriculture [11].
This study aimed to contribute to a deeper and contextualized understanding of farm household
sense-making processes—how people understand and give meaning to life events—in relation to the
current rapid food system transition in Myanmar. The study sought to document the views of local
smallholders by in-depth analysis of agricultural life stories to identify resilient and emergent strategies,
incentives, and innovative practices leading to sustainable agricultural commercialization while
achieving household food and nutrition security. The main research question was how do smallholder
farmers develop and implement adaptive strategies in response to food system transformations
leading to agricultural commercialization, in view of their agricultural livelihoods and diets during
their life-course?
1.1. Theoretical Outline
This study used various theoretical entry points. Firstly, the study used a conceptual framework,
developed from the literature, to identify and analyze development pathways from agricultural
commercialization to nutrition at the household level [15]. The literature showed several pathways
through which agriculture-oriented interventions may lead to positive food security and nutrition
outcomes: Subsistence-oriented production (source of food); production for sale (source of income);
and agricultural policies, affecting supply and demand factors defining the price of marketed food and
non-food crops [16,17]. Key elements to define the framework were drawn from existing frameworks to
assess food and nutrition security (FNS). For the nutrition components, the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF) framework on maternal and child undernutrition [18] and the framework for Actions
to Achieve Optimum Fetal and Child Nutrition and Development [19] were used. For FNS, the Food
and Agricultural Organization (FAO)’s Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Information and Mapping
System [20,21] and the framework for pathways described by Hertforth and Harris [22] were used.
For the commercialization components, the frameworks of Von Braun [23] and Kanter et al. [24],
describing the linkages between agriculture, food systems, nutrition, and health, were used. The
conceptual framework, presented in Figure 1, embraces a multi-level approach taking into account
several factors and dynamics that affect farm household livelihood outcomes: Individual level (gender
and power dynamics); household level (food production, income generation, food purchase choices,
152
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
off-farm labor, care practices, access to health care); community level (employment opportunity,
collaboration, microfinance, care and social (infra)structure); and regional and macro level (price and
trade policy). The ultimate focus of the framework is on the rural agricultural household interactions.
In this space, farmers negotiate their assets with the external environment through their decision- and
sense-making behaviours. These dynamics generate pathways, which cut across different levels and
can take various shapes and forms, potentially leading to changes for famers’ livelihoods. It also seeks
to include a life course perspective [20], emphasizing the non-linearity of many relations between
inputs and outcomes.
Secondly, to disentangle sense-making and decision-making processes happening in response to
commercialization, this study was based on three additional theoretical orientations. The salutogenic
theory was used, developed by Antonovsky [25,26] for health promotion, which posits that life
experiences help shape one’s sense of coherence, whereby life is understood as more or less
comprehensible, meaningful, and manageable. A strong sense of coherence helps one to mobilize
resources to cope with stressors and manage tension successfully. In its more general meaning,
salutogenesis refers to a scholarly orientation focusing attention on the study of the origins of health,
contra the origins of disease. Salutogenesis is in harmony with developments across the social sciences
that seek better understanding of positive aspects of human experience [27]. This theoretical orientation
was adopted to guide the analysis of farm household individuals’ strategies and coping mechanisms
promoting nutritious food consumption and production throughout the life-course [28], using the
concept of general resistance resources (resources that can aid resistance to stressors) [29].
The positive deviance theory was used to understand in which way successful farmers can
guarantee sustainable livelihoods through commercialization strategies in an environment where
others fail [30]. Social innovation theory was used to explore collective dynamics and the interactions
between different actors, policies, and interventions [31]. The emerging field of social innovation,
drawing on innovation, resilience, entrepreneurship, and organizational change thinking, seeks to
understand how individuals, organizations, and networks can generate new solutions for multiple
societal goals [32].
1.2. Definitions of Key Concepts Used in the Study
In this study, food system is defined as “a system that embraces all the elements (environment,
people, inputs, processes, infrastructure, institutions, markets and trade) and activities that relate to
the production, processing, distribution and marketing, preparation and consumption of food and the
outputs of these activities, including socio-economic and environmental outcomes” (p. 12) [33].
Commercialization is defined as the agricultural transformation process in which individual
farmers shift from a highly subsistence-oriented production towards more specialized production
targeting markets both for their input procurement and output supply [34]. Specialization and
commercialization could represent a more efficient strategy than subsistence for small farmers [35].
Food and nutrition security (FNS) is defined as “food and nutrition security exists when all people
at all times have physical, social and economic access to food, which is safe and consumed in sufficient
quantity and quality to meet their dietary needs and food preferences, and is supported by an environment
of adequate sanitation, health services and care, allowing for a healthy and active life” [36].
General resistant resources are defined as those resources that can aid resistance to stressors. These can
be of a physical nature (e.g., a strong physique, strong immune system, genetic strengths), art factual nature
(e.g., money, food, power), cognitive nature (e.g., intelligence, education, adaptive strategies for coping),
emotional nature (e.g., emotional intelligence), social nature (e.g., support from friends and/or family), or
macrosocial nature (e.g., culture and shared belief systems). General resistance resources can be identified
at different levels: Individual-level resources (internal, such as intelligence, religion, and philosophy,
genetic, and constitutional); family-level resources (material and emotional support), and community- and
society-level (material, knowledge, cultural stability, social support) [37].
153
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
Figure 1. Conceptual framework of development pathways from agricultural commercialization to nutrition [15].
154
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
2. Materials and Methods
The Dry Zone of central Myanmar, as shown in Figure 2, was selected for our case study
design [38]. This area is generally characterized as one of the most food insecure areas of the
country [39]. In 2011, the food security assessment by the World Food Program (WFP) classified
17% of households as severely, and 24% as moderately food insecure [40]. Under-five malnutrition
rates showed 7% of wasting and 29% of stunting [41]. Food availability strongly depends on monsoon
rains (from May to October). A majority of households rely on rain-fed cultivation on flatland.
Farm households generally own their agricultural land, but around 50% of the households in the area
are estimated to be landless [42]. Most households grow three or more different types of crops, most
commonly pulses, sesame, maize, and groundnuts, alongside animal sourced foods [13]. Over 90% of
the households rely on markets for rice [39].
Figure 2. Pakokku township in the Dry Zone.
Income is derived mainly from casual wage labor, farming, small trade, and sales (of livestock).
Farmers in the area have limited access to finance and inputs, especially for cultivation that is different
from paddies, which are promoted by the government [42]. The region is also characterized by a
high presence of female-headed households, due to migration of male family members, mainly to
urban centers in Myanmar [39]. Main health issues are poor hygiene practices, poor access to latrines,
and use of unprotected water sources, poor drinking water treatment practices, and inappropriate
care for sick children. Girls tend to have less access to education than boys [39]. The study area was
Pakokku Township in Magway division, in which five villages were selected: Kan Zauk, Sar Kyin,
Aung Tha, Oo Yinn, and Yar Lar Lay. Most of the villages count 100 to 200 households [43]. Villages
are organized around a group of leaders, who are supposed to actively help organize community
activities (i.e., ceremonies) or development actions.
2.1. Sampling and Household Selection
A non-probability-based, purposive sampling strategy was used to select positive deviant farm
households, i.e., those households reaching optimum results in an environment where the majority
fails. To identify positive deviants, we based our inclusion criteria of farmers engaged successfully
in commercial agriculture on local consultation with key stakeholders involved in agricultural
development and food security in Myanmar, acknowledging that ‘positive’, ‘healthy’, and ‘successful’
are socially constructed concepts. We did so believing these parameters were sufficient for the aim of
learning from the positive [44]. The criteria thus defined to select the households for this study were:
155
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
• Started farming as landless or smallholder (less than two ha of productive land). This threshold
was based on the fact that land is the most commonly used dimension for measuring farm size,
although other criteria can also be used. Small is a relative concept, depending on agro-ecological
as well as socio-economic considerations, but a 1 or 2 ha threshold is frequently used to designate
farms as small [45];
• engage or engaged in the past for at least 10 years in any form of market-oriented farming in the
study area; and
• relate directly to current concerns of ‘scaling up’ of technology, methods, social innovation, and
good and best practices.
Household selection was done on site, with support from a local non-governmental organization
(NGO). Fifteen households were thus identified, out of which 14 households entered the study. The one
drop out was a successful farmer who did not start as a smallholder. The inclusion of female-headed
households was emphasized. In each selected household, the household head was asked to participate
in the research. In some cases, more than one household member participated in the interview,
resulting in 20 individuals interviewed (8 women, 12 men). All respondents had settled in the village
where they were born.
Average self-reported farm size early in life was 1.6 acres (range: 0–8 acres), and grew to
7.5 acres (range 4–13 acres) at the time of the study. Average household size was 6.9 members
(range: 5–10 members). Average age of the respondents was 51.8 years (range: 31–66 years).
Only three households lived off agriculture, all others applied mixed livelihood strategies. Households
produced an average of 5.2 commercial crops (range: 3–8), including food and non-food (cotton)
crops. All household heads interviewed were literate, eight of them through monastery schools,
and in nine out of 14 cases, one of the household members had attended university. The majority
of children, however, supported the parents in agriculture activities or in off-farm jobs. In 10 out of
the 14 households, migration was common among the youth, some leaving for cities in Myanmar
(i.e., Mandalay and Yangon) and others to neighboring countries (i.e., Thailand and China). Table 1
summarizes the household characteristics involved in the study.
2.2. Data Collection
Data were collected during September–October 2017. Data were collected by means of qualitative
in-depth interviews using narrative inquiry as the method, including a timeline technique [46].
Narrative inquiry and other forms of qualitative non-structured inquiry have been used to explore food
stories in several studies. It has been applied to understand food choice factors [47], to explore food
related meanings [48], eating disorders [49,50], relationships with food [51], and healthy eating [52].
Narrative inquiry has also been used to understand whole food systems, including production
aspects [53]. The timeline technique was used as it is designed to respect contextual and historical
influences, generating data based on stakeholders’ individual and collective perceptions, thus reflecting
developments over time [54]. In addition, the timeline technique visualizes respondents’ perceptions
of what matters most, and serves as a graphic tool to guide and summarize the interview while doing
it, thus supporting both the researcher and respondent to gain insight and promotes learning on the
spot [55,56]. The combination of methods was chosen to:
1. Capture thoughts and emotions of individuals in more depth compared to the traditional
interview [57];
2. Capture the meanings attributed by respondents to their lives through the selection of
memories [58];
3. Favor self-reflection through the process of expressing their personal life-story [59]; and
4. Favor a reflection on changes in societal and cultural norms from which is it possible to extract
time and geographical bound socio-cultural practices [60,61].
156
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
Table 1. Respondent characteristics.
Village # Resp Sex Age yrs Education # Household
Members
Household
Livelihoods # Migrants/Household Type Commercial Crop % Product.
Sold *
Acres Owned
Start Farm **
Acres Owned
(2017) **
Kan Zauk
2 FM
60
51
Primary
Literate NS
***
8 Mixed **** 3 Groundnut, mung beans, toddy-palm 50% 0 5
1 F 44 Primary 7 Agriculture 0 Ground nut, mung bean, pigeon peas, sesame, toddy-palm 90% 0 7
1 M 56 Primary 6 Mixed 1 Ground nut, mung bean, pigeon peas, sesame, lablab bean,
potato, tomato, onion 50% 5 5
Sar Kyin
1 M 41 Primary 7 Mixed 1 Pigeon peas, cotton, sesame 50% 0 5.5
1 M 44 Literate NS 9 Mixed 1 Mung bean, pigeon peas, cotton, maize, sesame 80% 2 7
2 FM
66
66
Illiterate
Literate NS 8 Mixed 3 Ground nut, pigeon peas, cotton, maize, sesame 80% 0 13
1 M 43 Primary 6 Mixed 0 Pigeon peas, cotton, lablab bean, maize, sesame 80% 0 10
Oo Yinn
2 FM
58
55
Literate NS
Primary 5 Mixed 1 Maize, lablab bean, tomato, chili 90% 0 4
2 FF
60
58
Primary
Primary 6 Agriculture 0 Chick pea, maize, bean, chili, eggplant 80% 5 5
1 M 31 Primary 10 Mixed 2 Maize, chick pea, tomato, eggplant, chilly 60% 8 9
Yae Lar Lay 3
FFM
57
50
58
Literate NS
Intermediary
Literate NS
5 Mixed 0 Groundnut, sesame, pigeon pea, mung bean, cotton 70% 0 10
Aung Tha
1 M 56 Literate NS 7 Mixed 2 Groundnut, pigeon pea, maize, sesame 70% 3 7
1 M 41 Secondary 7 Agriculture 0 Chick pea, mung bean, green gram, maize, cotton, sesame,
groundnut, pigeon pea 95% 0 9
1 M 55 Literate NS 6 Mixed 2 Sesame, mung bean, pigeon pea, cotton, chick pea, groundnut
and maize 70% 0 9
* Self-reported percentage of agricultural production sold to the market; ** self-reported farm size; *** NS = No formal schooling or education; **** HH Mixed livelihoods refers to onand
off-farm/non-farm income generation.
157
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
The interview procedure included the following steps [52]:
1. Introduction and collecting data for respondent and household characteristics.
2. Drawing up the timeline: A timeline was drafted on a flipchart, whereby respondents freely
included important moments, transitions, turning points, etc. in relation to agricultural practices
and their diets.
3. In-depth interview: Respondents described their personal experience in relation with agriculture
and their diets in line with the events graphically plotted on the timeline. Particular attention
was given to important stages over the life course and how respondents dealt with challenges
and stressors.
4. Reflection on healthy food: Respondents were asked to select an item, which they associated with
healthy food, and to explain their choice.
The interviews were conducted in Burmese, were recorded, and then transcribed verbatim to
English by the translator.
2.3. Data Analysis
Thematic analysis was applied, using QDA Miner Lite software. The concept of general resistance
resources, as defined in the salutogenic theory, were used to develop top down coding to identify
adaptive strategies. Both top-down and bottom-up coding were applied. For top-down coding,
transcripts of the interviews were coded according to the theoretical framework, departing from
the characteristics as described for the general resistant resources. For bottom-up coding, a sample
of interviews was taken and analyzed. From these transcripts, salient points were underlined and
more elaborated sentences were added as comments on the margin. These sentences expressed a
slightly higher level of interpretation and were added to the final list of codes. Thus, a combined
list of top-down and bottom up coding was compiled. Two researchers did coding and discussed
inconsistencies until consensus on the interpretation was reached. Finally, findings were systematically
described upon discussion of the clustering of emerging themes in the research team. Quotes supported
the results to transmit unique concepts and meanings.
3. Results: Farm Household Adaptive Strategies over the Life Course
All respondents were involved in agriculture since childhood. They generally had to leave school
to help their family in the fields or with other income-generation activities, usually upon finishing
primary school. Childhood was generally described as a period of poverty during which food was
occasionally scarce and it was difficult to purchase other goods (i.e., clothes). After marriage, the main
life events described were related to childbirth and child development. Respondents indicated that,
compared to their parents, the current generation of farmers moved from semi-subsistence farming to
more market oriented farming. As someone said:
“When I was a child, my parents were selling half of the total harvest and we were eating the rest.
Now, I store my crops in my house and I wait until market prices are going up. We can also send our
crops to warehouses. They will keep it for you and you can sell to them at any time. In the past, we did
not have this option. Today, I grow crops with a market-oriented view.” [Male respondent Sar Kyin]
3.1. Agriculture-Related Events and Adaptive Strategies
During youth, respondents worked for others in order to save money and be able to buy land
and start a commercial farm for themselves. A common source of additional income in the area was
climbing toddy-palm tree (Borassus flabellifer L.) to collect the juice (toddy), practiced by young adults,
both men and women. The toddy ferments naturally and is locally popular as a beverage.) Young
women were also involved in raising animals, the selling of sweets and vegetables, and cotton fabric
production. Young men worked as pond diggers, shepherds, gold diggers, farm laborers, woodcutters,
brokers, teachers, and cooperative workers. Some temporarily migrated to neighboring villages.
158
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
A major life event was leaving the parental house, with having access to land as an important
precondition. Some respondents started their own farm by borrowing land while the majority directly
purchased the land. The main push factor to leave the parental house was family growth rather than
getting married and the consequent pressure on the parental household resources. Five respondents
indicated that they inherited a piece of land from their parents.
Respondents highlighted the flexibility in gender role division whereby women could buy and
inherit land, manage the farm, and conduct economic activities as a response to the absence of a
productive male member of the family. Female respondents indicated that they were not only involved
as a labor force in the fields, but they were actively participating or leading the decision-making
processes at the farm (household).
The main events and stressors for agriculture in the Dry Zone, where most farming is
rain-fed, relate to harvest loss due to climate or water-related problems, pests and pests or
infestations, as is illustrated in Figure 3. These events easily endangered families to become indebted.
One respondent recalled:
“Around 1999–2000, due to intensive rainfalls, < . . . > there was famine, particularly scarcity of rice
and also our crop (mung bean) in the field was damaged by fungus and we could not sell it. Therefore,
I borrowed money with high interest rate. I faced debt-burden and it was a very difficult time for me. I
tried to raise pigs to have an income. In that period, my husband was bitten by a snake and got sick.
This created more difficulties in our family.” [Female respondent Kan Zauk]]
Figure 3. Timeline agriculture-related events; blue line and text indicate adaptive responses.
In response to such stressors, the majority of the respondents engaged in immediate, short term
adaptive strategies, such as temporary income generation activities (raising pigs, making handcrafts,
off-farm work, etc.); contracting debts, using jewelry as collateral, and selling livestock and carts;
or collective action, for instance, to prevent the village from flooding.
More long-term adaptive strategies related predominantly to income stability to provide their
family with good living conditions by improving yields and profits, and working with improved
159
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
inputs and cultivation techniques. Most respondents felt that a stable income could not be achieved by
agriculture alone.
Adaptive strategies aiming for improved yields and profits, and being more responsive to price
fluctuations were geared through experimentation with new inputs and techniques. Another example
was a group of farmers, who organized themselves to rent a truck for selling their products to the
market, thus avoiding the intermediation of middlemen, and obtaining better prices and access to
new information.
Respondents showed awareness regarding more sustainable ways of food production and
consumption, including the possibility to produce organic products. The main problems highlighted
related to soil degradation and environment-related health problems. Respondents envisaged
continuing to farm, but there were concerns regarding the sustainability of the current agricultural
practices. In response, some started to experiment with organic farming. In one village, farmers
collaborated to produce organic groundnuts and constructed a mill for common use to produce
organic groundnut oil. Others, however, were more skeptical about the economic opportunities, and
considered organic farming as going back to methods that are more traditional. Most respondents
indicated that they practiced organic food production for household consumption while they were
using chemical fertilizers for the crops designated for the market.
Resistance resources used in adaptive strategies for agriculture.
Key resistance resources used in adaptive strategies for agriculture were identified.
• At the individual level, the Buddhist practices and beliefs were mentioned as an important
resistance resource to guarantee fortune and good health in the present and in the afterlife.
Practicing religion offered support to cope with events beyond people’s control. Other individual
level resources mentioned were related to (personal) values, knowledge, internal strength, and
being healthy. Some respondents explained that they could rely on their own or others’ knowledge
in the household, and their ability to properly apply it in certain situations.
• At the family-level, family ties were mentioned as the main network of resources, providing
material support and a sense of belonging. Through family ties, respondents gained access to
different kinds of capital:
- Natural, i.e., inheritance of family land;
- Physical, i.e., family assets, such as cattle, carts, bicycles, motorcycles, or agricultural tools;
- Financial, i.e., credit; relatives were mentioned as a source of financial capital in the form
of credit, but also children’s remittances and physical help in agriculture were crucial for
the sustainment of the household;
- Human, i.e., educational level of family members. Respondents made efforts to support
their children to complete their studies and find jobs outside the agricultural sector, as
input from the farm, but also hoping to spare them from the difficulties and struggles
experienced by the parents; and
- Social (i.e., family unity, perseverance); respondents indicated that parental support was
particularly relevant in the past, when they were young and lived under the parental roof
with the aim to save money for their own future investments.
• At the community level, community or social support from the village or the monasteries were
mentioned. Respondents highlighted a sense of unity and solidarity in their communities, which
helped farmers to develop their business, for example, farmers organizing to rent a truck to sell
directly to the market in order to avoid brokers’ intermediation, or villagers mobilizing themselves
to secure the riverbank during a flood. Other forms of resistance resources were mutual support
among families during hard times, joint production of handcraft, or support of each other by
borrowing money at low interest rates. An important community level resource was access to
and sharing of agricultural knowledge and information through different sources (traditional
160
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
knowledge, observation of other farmers, private companies, trainings by non-governmental
organizations, radio, TV, social media, books, university, smart phone). The majority of the
respondents indicated that the main source of information on market prices and agricultural
inputs and new techniques and inputs stems from fellow farmers.
• At the societal level, respondents mentioned the increased presence of NGOs, private companies,
a university, and, to some extent, governmental extension services over the years. These
actors provided farmers with trainings (on agriculture, food, or vocational training), access
to agricultural inputs (fertilizers, pesticides, seeds, tools, etc.), and market information. The
presence of microfinance organizations allowed farmers to access lower interest rates compared
to informal moneylenders. Some respondents felt that the support of NGOs was fundamental.
Others, however, expressed concerns related to dependency and the real effectiveness of the
help received. At the institutional and governance level, the transition towards more democracy
created space to form organizations. While, until recently, law in Myanmar forbade meetings
of more than five people, during the interviews, it became evident that associations are more
common now at the village level. Some respondents expressed the wish to be able to organize
more structured farmers’ organizations, enabling farmers to improve access to better information
and prices and advocate for farmers’ rights. Other societal resistance resources were related to
improved infrastructure (roads, smartphones, and internet) and inputs (better seeds, fertilizers).
Increased mobility of goods, people, and information created better opportunities for the farm
households to commercialize their products to the market. Table 2 summarizes an overview of
the adaptive strategies in agriculture described by the respondents.
Table 2. Respondents’ main adaptive strategies in agriculture.
Stressor Adaptive Strategies Applied Goal Key Resistance Resources
Endangered family
living conditions
Agriculture with diversified production
(incl. cash crops)
Income stability
Individual:
Physical health, strength, (tacit) knowledge,
perseverance, faith, austere lifestyle
Family:
Parental support, land, financial capital and
credit, remittances, labor, education and
agricultural knowledge of family members,
social support
Community:
Information sharing of agricultural
knowledge, sense of unity and solidarity,
business collaboration, (social) protection,
collaboration for disaster mitigation
Society
agriculture, food, or vocational training by
various actors (NGOs, private companies,
knowledge institutes), government
extension services), microfinance,
improved infrastructure, increased
opportunities for famers cooperating
and organization
Agriculture and husbandry
Agriculture, husbandry, and migration
Agriculture, husbandry, and self-employment
Agriculture and migration of a family member
Agriculture and self-employment
Change type of crops in response
to climatic conditions
Harvest loss due to
climate or pests
Increase use of chemical pesticides and fertilizers
(organic and chemical) Improve yields
Crop rotation and profit
Change type of crops in response to market
fluctuations
Better inputs and
cultivation techniques
Price fluctuations
Storage of products until prices are favourable to sell
Responsiveness to price
Improved information on market prices fluctuations
Join forces to facilitate/improve market access
Viability of farming
and food system
Participate in training
Continue with or re-introduction of rational farming Sustainable farming
practices/Traditional tillage
Organic farming
3.2. Farm Households’ Diet-Related Events and Adaptive Strategies
For diet-related life events, respondents described a transition towards better access, availability,
and stability of diverse diets. In the past, families used to rely on home production for food.
Markets were difficult to access due to road conditions, and could only be reached by car or on
foot. Food availability in the past was considered to be even more dependent on seasonality and
natural events than today. Rice was rarely cultivated in the area. Three farmers mentioned that the
demonetization, leading to political events in 1988, negatively affected the availability of rice and forced
them to mix rice to other grains. Most of the respondents (13 out of 14) were used to consuming rice
161
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
alongside or substituted with other staple foods (i.e., maize, millet), but this was generally associated
with poverty and disliked by respondents.
Collecting plants and food from the forest, such as bamboo shoots and mushrooms, was common
during childhood. The local food environment offered a wide diversity of non-processed food that was
considered stable, available, and accessible by respondents. Traditional crops included beans, rosella,
gourd, eggplant, potato, water spinach, groundnut (oil), sesame, tomato, chilly, pumpkin, bitter melon,
watermelon, and other plants growing naturally. As was highlighted:
“At my parent’s time, this area was very poor and vulnerable and we used to eat food in a traditional
way. There were available only local vegetables and fruits like beans, rosella and bean leaves that we
grow ourselves.” [Male respondent Kan Zauk]
Respondents indicated that, compared to their childhood, the current diet had improved. They ate
fish, meat, eggs, milk, and fruits more often because of increased incomes, improved access to markets,
and improved political stability, notably moderating the price of rice (Figure 4). At the moment of the
interview, most respondents owned a motorcycle and roads were in good condition even though they
were not paved. Meat and (dried) fish were particular food items associated with income increase,
but most households also relied on the market for rice.
Respondents were also asked what type of crops were produced for home consumption, and what
foods were bought from the market. Main foods grown for home-consumption were maize, sesame,
groundnut, pulses and beans, chili, onion, potato, and various vegetables and fruits (bananas, mango,
and watermelon). Main foods bought from the market were rice, noodles, chickpeas, yard long beans,
spices (garlic, ginger), potato, sweet potato, various vegetables and fruits, oil, eggs, meat, chicken, fish,
cookies, tea, and soya chunks. Some farmers were more dependent on the market for access to food.
Others made an intentional choice for depending on the market for economic or health-related reasons.
Figure 4. Timeline diet-related events; blue line and text indicate adaptive responses.
162
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
When asked about their eating habits, respondents indicated that, traditionally, respondents
consumed three meals a day. Meals consisted of a main dish (usually rice or rice noodles) and two
or more different curries—made of vegetables, pulses, grains, fish, mushrooms, bamboo shoots,
meat—served in small portions and placed in the middle of the table. Women were in charge of food
selection and preparation.
Food choice was not primarily guided by scholarly knowledge on nutritious foods or nutrition,
oftentimes introduced through training by NGOs. The information of ‘declarative’—factual and
evidence-based—nutritional knowledge seemed more related to food choice for children, rather than
to respondents’ choices relating to the production of food and daily choices of food. Fish, meat, eggs,
milk, potatoes, and seasonal vegetables were considered good food for children. As someone said:
“In the past, we never considered eating healthy food and we were just eating for work and living. We
had to eat what we had. Lately we got some money, we buy what we want to eat but without thinking
about nutritious food consumption.” [Female respondent Kan Zauk]
Food and nutrition security considerations at the household level were mainly related to the
affordability of certain kinds of food (like meat and fish) and access to organic food, understood as
access to food free from contaminants. A main concern expressed by respondents connecting health
to food related to their awareness around the contamination of food by pesticides, fertilizers, and
other products endangering their health. Respondents reported to have learned about it from books,
trainings, and from others. For this reason, some of the respondents preferred to grow organic food for
their household consumption or buy organic food from other farmers.
Resistance resources used in adaptive strategies for diet-related events.
Key resistance resources used in adaptive strategies for diet-related events were identified, and
related to a large extent to what was also found for the adaptive strategies in agriculture. Most
prominently:
• At the individual level, practicing religion offered support to cope with events as well as (personal)
values, tacit knowledge on food, internal strength, and being healthy.
• At the family-level, the family income as a means to get access to market goods, came out most
prominently, but also other kinds of household capital:
- Physical, i.e., cattle, motorcycles;
- Financial, i.e., credit; relatives were mentioned as a source of financial capital, children’s
remittances were crucial for the sustainment of the household;
- Human, i.e., educational level of family members; and
- Social (i.e., family unity); respondents indicated that family support was particularly
relevant in relation to child and family care. In addition, wives were taking over tasks of
the husband in the case of absence or illness.
• At the community level, respondents, as was mentioned for agricultural events, highlighted access
to and sharing of knowledge and information on nutrition, health, food preparation, and care,
mainly originating from trainings by NGOs, radio, TV, and social media. In addition, knowledge
sharing on organic food farming for home consumption was highlighted.
• At the societal level, respondents, as was mentioned for agricultural events, highlighted in
particular the role of NGOs as a source of information. In addition, the improved roads, increasing
mobility, and access to smartphones and the internet, were re-emphasized. Respondents expressed
the wish to be able to organize more structured farmers’ organizations. Table 3 summarizes an
overview of respondents’ adaptive strategies in diet-related events.
163
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
Table 3. Respondents’ adaptive strategies to diet-related events.
Stressor Adaptive Strategies Applied Goal Key Resistance Resources
Lack of
nutritious food
Collecting food (from the wild)
Stability of access to food
Individual:
Physical health, strength, (tacit) knowledge, faith,
austere lifestyle
Family:
Financial capital and credit, remittances, labor,
education and tacit knowledge of family members,
family care and social support
Community:
Information sharing of knowledge on nutrition, food
safety and health, and on organic food production,
sense of unity and solidarity
Society
Nutrition and health training by various actors
(NGOs, improved infrastructure
Home production of food
Eating less preferred food
Regular meal frequency
Home production of food
Buying foods from the market, in particular animal Better dietary diversity
sources foods
Lack of
market access
Commercial farming
Remittances Increased income
Off-farm labour
Purchase of means of transport
Join forces to facilitate/improve market access Better means of transport
Lack of food
safety and
unhealthy diets
Participate in training
Continue with or re-introduction of rational farming Sustainable diets
practices/no contaminants
Organic food production for home consumption
4. Discussion
The aim of this study was to disentangle adaptive processes in farm households in Myanmar,
balancing interests in commercial farming and consumption of nutritious foods, through an in-depth
analysis of agricultural life stories (narratives) in order to identify resilient and emergent strategies,
incentives, and forms of social innovation.
Relating to the research question ‘How do smallholder farmers develop and implement adaptive
strategies in response to food system transformations leading to agricultural commercialization,
in view of their agricultural livelihoods and diets during their life-course?’, our findings indicate
that the selected farm households all started as landless or as smallholders, and became successful
over time. Transitions had a role in shaping respondents’ orientations towards agriculture and food.
Most respondents had in common a smooth transition from the parental to the conjugal house, to which
the majority attributed an increased sense of wellbeing relating to parental support, as most of them
lived under the parental roof, working for others and saving money until they cumulated enough
capital to purchase land. These findings are consistent with results reported by Croll [62], who,
based on ethnographic studies across East, Southeast, and South Asia, suggested that generations
have taken new steps to invest in the intergenerational contract, which has been renegotiated and
reinterpreted by both generations in support of a robust and reciprocated cycle of care.
The farm households identified were involved in an agricultural transformation process, shifting
from a subsistence-oriented production toward a more market-oriented agriculture. However, during
this process of commercialization, farmers did not specialize to become more efficient, as suggested
by Jaleta et al. [34], but diversified their agricultural production in order to become more resilient
to various types pf stressors. Contrary to the observations of Rerkasem et al. [7], the process
of commercialization did not seem to result in a decline in crop diversity per household, as an
important adaptive strategy was to change crops in response to climate stressors or market fluctuations.
Being flexible and diversifying livelihood strategies emerged as successful strategies to deal with
recurrent challenges of different natures. This is consistent with findings reported by Ellis [63].
He found that many of the attributes to diversification as an individual or household level survival
strategy might be associated with success at achieving livelihood security under improving economic
conditions as well as with livelihood distress in deteriorating conditions rather than just being a
strategy of desperation, or a transient phenomenon. Ellis concluded that acquiring the capability to
diversify income sources signifies an improvement in the livelihood security and income-increasing
capabilities of the rural household, and therefore advocated that policies that reduce constraints to
diversification and widen its possibilities are, in general, desirable. Diversification within agriculture
to take advantage of new markets is also a desirable policy emphasis.
164
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
Farmers’ sense-making and decision-making processes considering agriculture engagement
were found to differ from those around family food and nutrition security. This is suggested by the
finding that a common strategy was to produce (or buy) organic food for household consumption
and use chemical inputs for agri-business. Some farmers even expressed a preference for organic,
more sustainable ways of agricultural production, but for economic reasons, the majority had to rely on
non-organic inputs and practices. The importance of food pricing is an influential factor when it comes
to the consumption and production of organic food. Meeker and Haddad had similar observations [17].
Increases in income due to agricultural commercialization and diversified livelihood strategies
contributed largely to increased dietary diversity, which is consistent with findings reported by Meeker
and Haddad [17]. Income from off-farm sources played an important role for the household wellbeing
and especially for accessing food, since all the respondents were dependent from the market for rice.
The scarcity of processed food in the local markets induced an increase of fruit, vegetables, meat, and
fish consumption. This trend may change in the future, when an influx of processed foods can be
expected in response to the on-going transitions in Myanmar.
Consumption patterns did not seem to differ very much from the traditional diets consumed
by previous generations, despite the fact that respondents also highlighted an increased access
to and availability of (more diverse) foods over their life. This aligns with findings reported by
Devine et al. [61] and Rosen [52], who indicated that the positive connotation associated with eating
traditional foods might be a result of positive family interactions around food and eating. In addition,
as Swan suggested, declarative knowledge (knowing the facts about nutritious food) is less influential
for people’s diets than procedural knowledge (how to acquire certain skills in relation to food) [64].
Our findings also indicated that Myanmar farmers were able to regain stability and structure after
stressful life events, and apply craftiness and fortitude during challenging moments. In the literature,
these skills were found to be connected with heathy eating habits [55]. Higher perceived neighborhood
collective efficacy is another predictor for healthy eating habits [64].
Our case study showed that women made decisions in relation to both production and
consumption of food. Women were in charge of food utilization at the household level. In some
cases, they were in charge of the farm and they could buy land. In line with this, women defined
themselves as skillful in the art of selecting, purchasing, and preparing good meals for their family.
This supports the role of women in ensuring food and nutrition security at the household level [17].
Our findings indicated some evidence for new forms of inclusive community-led organizations
taking root, often in connection with the process of democratization in Myanmar. Until recently,
in Myanmar, people were not allowed to meet in public at the community level. Limitations for
bottom-up forms of organization were still present at the moment of the interview, but some forms of
organizations existed and some respondents were actively participating or even leading community
groups. Most of the strategies identified in this study, mostly introduced and guided by actors, such as
schools, NGOs, or the government, can best be defined as socio-political or socio-organizational
innovations derived from the recent possibility of citizens to exercise their rights of free association [65].
Village level organizations promoted grassroots solutions for pressing societal issues (the common mill)
and some individuals were willing to organize more systemic innovation involving organizational
and institutional frameworks [66].
Overall, this study shows how individuals developed a wide set of adaptive strategies in response
to a wide set of stressors (family-, agriculture-, diet-related). Our study confirms that agricultural
commercialization and food and nutrition security are interrelated through a set of pathways, which
are embedded in local sense-making and decision-making patterns. Turning points that had a positive
influence on respondents’ ways of producing and consuming food were: (i) Inheritance or purchasing
of land; (ii) introduction of better agricultural input; (iii) improved access to the market, and (iv)
participation in agricultural and nutritional trainings.
165
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
Methodological Considerations
The study was built on a conceptual framework for the analysis of pathways for linking
agricultural commercialization to nutritious food consumption [15] to support the analysis at multiple
levels. Specifically, the framework helped to disentangle the agricultural household interactions
with the external environment. Furthermore, the study combined three theoretical orientations,
which proved useful to generate a rich and contextualized description of farm household sense-making
processes in relation to the rapid agricultural transitions currently occurring in Myanmar, and the
implications for household food and nutrition security. The theoretical lenses of salutogenesis and
life-course perspective helped to identify how experiences shaped respondents’ connection with
agriculture and food. Use of narrative techniques, in particular the timeline technique, generated
actor-driven data and generated fruitful discussions on identifying what actually happened over time.
The theoretical lens of positive deviance helped to develop an approach to identify farm
households who practiced affordable, acceptable, and sustainable strategies, which might have
potential to be adopted and shared within the Myanmar context [67]. Selection criteria for positive
deviants, though, are highly dependent on the context of the research [45]. In previous studies
involving positive deviants, farmer’s income (high), land ownership, and absence of debts were used
as criteria for inclusion [68]. For this study, particular importance has been given to farm size [45].
Several limitations to our exploratory study need to be highlighted. Firstly, the case study
approach does not support easy generalization of our findings beyond the area of focus. Our sample
consisted of respondents selected by local actors. Participation was on a voluntary basis. This may
have created a bias in favor of respondents most willing to talk about their lives. Therefore, our
findings relating to successful adaptive strategies in response to life-, agriculture-, and diet –related
events, cannot simply be extrapolated to other actors or regions. In addition, we have not included
non-farm rural households, which may equally suffer from stressors in life, agriculture, and diets,
which offers an interesting avenue for future research.
Secondly, the timeline technique builds on techniques for organizational and intercultural
learning [69,70], requiring good facilitating skills to manage the conversation and watch over the
process of sense making of the actor-driven retrospective recollection of events and the determination
of their significance. The fact that we had to work with a local enumerator and with translations of
transcripts may have affected the process of capturing all fine details in conversations, thus setting
some practical boundaries to our information needs and data collected. In addition, different beliefs
about agriculture and food concepts across cultures may have influenced our understanding and
interpretation of the information [71].
Thirdly, the positive deviance approach could insufficiently be substantiated with quantitative
data for selection of successful farm households, due to a lack of reliable data in Myanmar. Ideally,
a case-based qualitative exploratory design, like the one we used, should add or include further
quantitative assessments to underpin the contextualized observations [44].
5. Conclusions
This study shows how an understanding of local diets provides insights on possible entry points
for nutritionally sensitive agriculture. The diversification of livelihoods and social and emotional
components, identified in this study, played a major role in guaranteeing successful outcomes.
This suggests a need for alternative strategies moving away from specialization and intensification
strategies usually promoted by agri-businesses. This also suggests a need for alternative strategies of
(international) NGOs, whose interventionist and project-based approaches usually offer standardized
solutions and restricts farmers in mono-directional livelihoods.
This study also shows how important holistic solutions and resilience strategies are for success.
Therefore, reinforcing the flexibility and resilience of successful farmers should be a key element to
integrate into project strategies. Having diversified livelihood strategies allows farmers to experiment
and innovate while holding a strong fallback position represented by other sources of income.
166
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
In addition, this study showed how emotional and economic support during youth could represent
a solid base for the future. Overall, this study seeks to underline the importance for policies and
interventions to be informed by participatory and holistic baseline assessment whereby the theory of
change of all the relevant stakeholders is taken in account. As emerged from this study, declarative
knowledge transmitted through formative training did not seem to have significant implications for
people’s food choices. The inclusion of procedural knowledge in food and nutrition security programs
and the impact of procedural knowledge transmission rather than declarative could represent an
interesting field of research.
6. Ethical Considerations
All participants entered into the research with voluntary consent. They were provided with
information about the purpose and contents of the study. Guarantees of confidentiality and anonymity
were given prior to each interview. Moreover, participants were able to withdraw from the study at
any time for any reason. The authors declare that the study was conducted in accordance with general
ethical guidelines for behavioral and social research in the Netherlands. These guidelines stipulate that
behavioral research falls outside the scope of the Act on review of medical research involving human
subjects (WMO) when a study is not of a medical nature, and subjects do not receive a particular
treatment or are asked to behave in a particular way [72].
Author Contributions: M.H. provided overall methodological guidance and facilitated the writing process by
providing draft text. M.G. conducted fieldwork in Myanmar. B.P. and J.B. contributed especially with the social
innovation part. M.H., B.P. and D.B. were the main authors of the methodological framework presented in
Annex A1.
Funding: This research was funded by The Netherlands Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality,
Knowledge Base Research Funds 22 and 28.
Acknowledgments: We acknowledge the support of the Dutch Embassy and our colleague Jan Verhagen in
allowing us to be introduced with potentially interested contacts in Myanmar. In particular, we express our
gratitude to Greenovator, Myanmar Heart Development and ZawWin Kyaw in supporting the fieldwork and
data collection.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acronyms
ASEAN Association of South East Asia Nations
FAO United Nations Food and Agricultural Organisation
FNS Food and Nutrition Security
LMICs Low and Middle Income Countries
NGOs Non-governmental Organizations
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund
WCDI Wageningen Centre for Development Innovation,
WFP World Food Program
WUR Wageningen University & Research
References
1. USAID. Convergence and Tension in Nutrition-Sensitive Agricultural Market Development Activities [Draft];
Discussion Paper; USAID: Washington, DC, USA, 2016.
2. Westhoek, H.; Ingram, J.; Van Berkum, S.; Özay, L.; Hajer, M. Food Systems and Natural Resources; United
Nations Environment Programme-International Resource Panel: Paris, France, 2016.
3. Carletto, G.; Ruel, M.; Winters, P.; Zezza, A. Farm-Level Pathways to Improved Nutritional Status:
Introduction to the Special Issue. J. Dev. Stud. 2015, 51, 945–957. [CrossRef]
4. Hawkes, C.; Ruel, M. Value Chains for Nutrition. In Reshaping Agriculture for Nutrition and Health; IFPRI, Ed.;
IFPRI Publications: Washington, DC, USA, 2012.
167
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
5. Pingali, P.L. Environmental consequences of agricultural commercialization in Asia. Environ. Dev. Econ.
2001, 6, 483–502. [CrossRef]
6. Pingali, P.L.; Rosegrant, M.W. Agricultural commercialization and diversification: Processes and policies.
Food Policy 1995, 20, 171–185. [CrossRef]
7. Rerkasem, K.; Lawrence, D.; Padoch, C.; Schmidt-Vogt, D.; Ziegler, A.D.; Bruun, T.B. Consequences of
swidden transitions for crop and fallow biodiversity in Southeast Asia. Hum. Ecol. 2009, 37, 347–360.
[CrossRef]
8. Anderman, T.L.; Remans, R.;Wood, S.A.; DeRosa, K.; DeFries, R.S. Synergies and tradeoffs between cash
crop production and food security: A case study in rural Ghana. Food Secur. 2014, 6, 541–554. [CrossRef]
9. Miller, D.D.; Welch, R.M. Food system strategies for preventing micronutrient malnutrition. Food Policy 2013,
42, 115–128. [CrossRef]
10. Fisher, J. Myanmar’s 2015 Landmark Elections Explained; BBC, Ed.; BBC: London, UK, 2015.
11. Haggblade, S.; Boughton, D.; Cho, K.M.; Denning, G.; Kloeppinger-Todd, R.; Oo, Z.; Sandar, T.M.; Than, T.M.;
Wai, N.E.M.A.; Wilson, S.; et al. Strategic choices shaping agricultural performance and food security in
Myanmar. J. Int. Aff. 2014, 67, 55–71.
12. Rammohan, A.; Pritchard, B. The role of landholding as a determinant of food and nutrition insecurity in
rural Myanmar. World Dev. 2014, 64, 597–608. [CrossRef]
13. Wilson, S.; Aye Wai, N.E.M. Background Paper No. 4: Food and Nutrition Security in Burma; MDRI-CESD, Ed.;
USAID: Washington, DC, USA, 2013.
14. Mercy Corps. What Holds Vegetables Farmers Back? Conflict, Governance and Markets Assessment. Making
Vegetable Markets Work for Smallholders Program; LIFT Fund: Yangon, Myanmar, 2015.
15. Herens, M.; Peters, B.; Brouwers, J.; Bosch, D.; Van der Maden, E.; Linderhof, V.; Verhagen, J. Commercially
Viable Agriculture and Consumption of Nutritious Foods: A Framework for Identifying Development Pathways;
Wageningen Centre for Development: Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2018; p. 53.
16. Hawkes, C.; Ruel, M. From Agriculture to Nutrition: Pathways, Synergies and Outcomes;World Bank Agriculture
and Rural Development Department: Washington, DC, USA, 2007.
17. Meeker, J.; Haddad, L. A State of the Art Review of Agriculture-Nutrition Linkages; An AgriDiet Position Paper;
Department of Food Business and Development, University College Cork: Cork, Ireland, 2013.
18. UNICEF. Conceptual Framewrok for Nutrition; UNICEF: New York, NY, USA, 1991.
19. Black, R.E.; Victora, C.G.; Walker, S.P.; Bhutta, Z.A.; Christian, P.; de Onis, M.; Ezzati, M.;
Grantham-McGregor, S.; Katz, J.; Martorell, R. Maternal and child undernutrition and overweight in
low-income and middle-income countries. Lancet 2013, 382, 427–451. [CrossRef]
20. FAO/FIVIMS. FAO/FIVIMS Framework: Linkages between the Overall Development Context, the Food Economy
Households, and Individual Measures of Well-Being; FAO: Rome, Italy, 2008.
21. Webb, P. Impact Pathways from Agricultural Research to Improved Nutrition and Health: Literature Analysis and
Research Priorities; Background Paper Prepared for the ICN2; FAO: Rome, Italy, 2013.
22. Herforth, A.; Harris, J. Understanding and Applying Primary Pathways and Principles Improving Nutrition
through Agriculture. In Technical Brief Series Strengthening Partnerships, Results, and Innovations in Nutrition
Globally (SPRING) Project; USAID: Arlington, VA, USA, 2014.
23. Von Braun, J. Agricultural commercialization: Impacts on income and nutrition and implications for policy.
Food Policy 1995, 20, 187–202. [CrossRef]
24. Kanter, R.;Walls, H.L.; Tak, M.; Roberts, F.;Waage, J. A conceptual framework for understanding the impacts
of agriculture and food system policies on nutrition and health. Food Secur. 2015, 7, 767–777. [CrossRef]
25. Antonovsky, A. The salutogenic model as a theory to guide health promotion. Health Promot. Int. 1996, 11,
11–18. [CrossRef]
26. Antonovsky, A. Health, Stress and Coping; Jossey-Bass: San Francisco, CA, USA, 1979.
27. Mittelmark, M.B.; Bauer, G.F. The Meanings of Salutogenesis. In The Handbook of Salutogenesis;
Mittelmark, M.B., Sagy, S., Eriksson, M., Bauer, G.F., Pelikan, J.M., Eds.; Springer International Publishing:
Cham, Switzerland, 2017; pp. 7–13.
28. Lindström, B.; Eriksson, M. The Hitchhiker’s Guide to Salutogenesis: Salutogenic Pathways to Health Promotion;
Folkhälsan Research Center: Helsinki, Finland, 2010.
29. Mittelmark, M.B.; Sagy, S.; Eriksson, M.; Bauer, G.F.; Pelikan, J.M. The Handbook of Salutogenesis; Springer:
Cham, Switzerland, 2017.
168
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
30. Pascale, R.T.; Sternin, J.; Sternin, M. The Power of Positive Deviance: How Unlikely Innovators Solve the World’s
Toughest Problems; Harvard Business Press: Boston, MA, USA, 2010; Volume 1.
31. Nicholls, A.; Simon, J.; Gabriel, M.; Whelan, C. New Frontiers in Social Innovation Research; Springer:
Berlin, Germany, 2016.
32. Olsson, P.; Moore, M.-L.; Westley, F.R.; McCarthy, D.D.P. The Concept of the Anthropocene as a
Game-Changer. Ecol. Soc. 2017, 22, 31. [CrossRef]
33. HLPE. Food Losses and Waste in the Context of Sustainable Food Systems; FAO, UN Committee on World Food
Security: Rome, Italy, 2014.
34. Jaleta, M.; Gebremedhin, B.; Hoekstra, D. Smallholder Commercialization: Processes, Determinants and
Impact. In Improving Productivity and Market Success of Ethiopian Farmers Improving Market Opportunities;
International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI): Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 2009.
35. Gebremedhin, B.; Jaleta, M. Commercialization of Smallholders: Does Market Orientation Translate into Market
Participation? ILRI (aka ILCA and ILRAD): Nairobi, Kenya, 2010.
36. UNSCN. Meeting of the Minds on Nutrition Impact of Food Systems; United Nations Standing Committee on
Nutrition (UNSCN): Geneva, Switzerland, 2013.
37. Griffiths, C.A.; Ryan, P.; Foster, J.H. Thematic analysis of Antonovsky’s sense of coherence theory.
Scand. J. Psychol. 2011, 52, 168–173. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Bowling, A.; Ebrahim, S. Handbook of Health Research Methods: Investigation, Measurement and Analysis;
McGraw-Hill Education: London, UK, 2005.
39. Ah Poe, C. Food Security Assessment in the Dry Zone Myanmar. 2011. Available online: http://documents.
wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/ena/wfp234780.pdf?iframe (accessed on 14 May 2017).
40. Shaw, J.E. Assessment of Stakeholder Interventions for Sustainable Agriculture in Myanmar’s Dry Zone. 2016.
Available online: http://uncapsa.org/?q=publications/assessment-stakeholder-interventions-sustainableagriculture-
myanmar%E2%80%99s-dry-zone (accessed on 14 May 2017).
41. Ministry of Health and Sports and ICF. Myanmar Demographic and Health Survey 2015-16. In The DHS
Program; MoHS and ICF: Naypyidaw, Myanmar, 2017.
42. Thorpe, J. Delivering Prosperity in Myanmar’s Dry Zone. Lessons from Mandalay and Magwe on Realizing the
Economic Potential of Small-Scale Farmers; Oxfam Briefing Paper; Oxfam GB: Oxford, UK, 2014.
43. MHDO. Dry Zone Food for Asset Creation Project WFP; Pakokku & Ngape Townships, Magwe Region, WFP,
Eds.; Mynamar Heart Development Organization (MHDO): Yangon, Myanmar, 2017.
44. Biggs, S. Learning from the positive to reduce rural poverty and increase social justice: Institutional
innovations in agricultural and natural resources research and development. Exp. Agric. 2008, 44, 37–60.
[CrossRef]
45. Lowder, S.K.; Skoet, J.; Raney, T. The number, size, and distribution of farms, smallholder farms, and family
farms worldwide. World Dev. 2016, 87, 16–29. [CrossRef]
46. Wielinga, E.; Vrolijk, M. Language and Tools for Networkers. J. Agric. Educ. Ext. 2009, 15, 205–217. [CrossRef]
47. Edquist, S.; Koch, P.; Contento, I.R. Understanding Adolescent Food Choices through Personal Food Stories.
J. Nutr. Educ. Behav. 2009, 41, S16–S17. [CrossRef]
48. Newcombe, M.A.; McCarthy, M.B.; Cronin, J.M.; McCarthy, S.N. “Eat like a man”. A social constructionist
analysis of the role of food in men’s lives. Appetite 2012, 59, 391–398. [CrossRef]
49. Papathomas, A.; Lavallee, D. Narrative Constructions of Anorexia and Abuse: An Athlete’s Search for
Meaning in Trauma. J. Loss Trauma 2011, 17, 293–318. [CrossRef]
50. McCormack, L.; Lewis, V.; Wells, J.R. Early Life Loss and Trauma: Eating Disorder Onset in a Middle-Aged
Male—A Case Study. Am. J. Mens Health 2014, 8, 121–136. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51. Busanich, R.; McGannon, K.R.; Schinke, R.J. Expanding understandings of the body, food and exercise
relationship in distance runners: A narrative approach. Psychol. Sport Exerc. 2012, 13, 582–590. [CrossRef]
52. Rosen, L. Salutogenic Lives: Stories of Healthy Eaters. In Health and Society, Social Sciences Department;
Wageningen University: Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2015.
53. O’Kane, G.; Pamphilon, B. The importance of stories in understanding people’s relationship to food:
Narrative inquiry methodology has much to offer the public health nutrition researcher and practitioner.
Public Health Nutr. 2016, 19, 585–592. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Wielinga, E.; Herens, M. Monitoring Creative Processes: The Timeline and Learning History. In 21st European
Seminar on Extension Education; Routledge: Antalya, Turkey, 2013.
169
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4721
55. Hughes, I. Action research in healthcare. In The Sage Handbook of Action Research: Participative Inquiry and
Practice; Reason, P., Bradbury, H., Eds.; Sage: London, UK, 2008; pp. 381–393.
56. Koelen, M.A.; van den Ban, A.W. Health Education and Health Promotion; Wageningen Academic Publishers:
Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2004; p. 285.
57. Savin-Baden, M.; Niekerk, L.V. Narrative Inquiry: Theory and Practice. J. Geogr. High. Educ. 2007, 31,
459–472. [CrossRef]
58. Polkinghorne, D.E. Validity Issues in Narrative Research. Qual. Inq. 2007, 13, 471–486. [CrossRef]
59. Sheridan, J.; Chamberlain, K. The Power of Things. Qual. Res. Psychol. 2011, 8, 315–332. [CrossRef]
60. Devine, C.M. A life course perspective: Understanding food choices in time, social location, and history.
J. Nutr. Educ. Behav. 2005, 37, 121–128. [CrossRef]
61. Devine, C.M.; Connors, M.; Bisogni, C.A.; Sobal, J. Life-Course Influences on Fruit and Vegetable Trajectories:
Qualitative Analysis of Food Choices. J. Nutr. Educ. 1998, 30, 361–370. [CrossRef]
62. Croll, E.J. The Intergenerational Contract in the Changing Asian Family. Oxf. Dev. Stud. 2006, 34, 473–491.
[CrossRef]
63. Ellis, F. Household strategies and rural livelihood diversification. J. Dev. Stud. 1998, 35, 1–38. [CrossRef]
64. Swan, E.; Bouwman, L.; Hiddink, G.J.; Aarts, N.; Koelen, M. Profiling healthy eaters. Determining factors
that predict healthy eating practices among Dutch adults. Appetite 2015, 89, 122–130. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Wigboldus, S. Ten Types of Social Innovation—A Brief Discussion Paper; Wageningen CDI Working Paper;
WCDI, Ed.; Wageningen University and Research: Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2016.
66. Van der Have, R.P.; Rubalcaba, L. Social innovation research: An emerging area of innovation studies?
Res. Policy 2016, 45, 1923–1935. [CrossRef]
67. Marsh, D.R.; Schroeder, D.G.; Dearden, K.A.; Sternin, J.; Sternin, M. The power of positive deviance. BMJ
2004, 329, 1177–1179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. De Adelhart Toorop, R.; Gosselink, K. Analysis of Positive Deviants Among Organic Dairy Farmers in The
Netherlands;Wageningen University: Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2013.
69. Brunton, M.A.; Jeffrey, L.M. Using the critical incident technique for triangulation and elaboration of
communication management competencies. J. Vocat. Educ. Train. 2010, 62, 239–255. [CrossRef]
70. McAllister, L.; Whiteford, G.; Hill, B.; Thomas, N.; Fitzgerald, M. Reflection in intercultural learning:
Examining the international experience through a critical incident approach. Reflective Pract. 2006, 7, 367–381.
[CrossRef]
71. Bonevski, B.; Randell, M.; Paul, C.; Chapman, K.; Twyman, L.; Bryant, J.; Brozek, I.; Hughes, C. Reaching the
hard-to-reach: A systematic review of strategies for improving health and medical research with socially
disadvantaged groups. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 2014, 14, 42. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. CCMO. Manual for the review of medical research involving human subjects. In Behavioural Research and
the WMO; CCMO [Central Committee on Human Related Research]: The Hague, The Netherlands, 2002;
pp. 66–69.
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
170
sustainability
Article
Intensification and Upgrading Dynamics in Emerging
Dairy Clusters in the East African Highlands
Jan van der Lee 1,*, Laurens Klerkx 2, Bockline Omedo Bebe 3, Ashenafi Mengistu 4 and
Simon Oosting 5
1 Wageningen UR Livestock Research, PO Box 338, 6700 AHWageningen, The Netherlands
2 Knowledge, Technology and Innovation Group,Wageningen University, 6700 EWWageningen,
The Netherlands; laurens.klerkx@wur.nl
3 Department of Animal Sciences, Egerton University; Njoro, 20115 Egerton, Kenya; bbebe@egerton.ac.ke
4 College of Veterinary Medicine and Agriculture, Addis Ababa University, Bishoftu, Ethiopia;
mengistuashenafi@gmail.com
5 Department of Animal Science,Wageningen University; 6708 WDWageningen, The Netherlands;
simon.oosting@wur.nl
* Correspondence: jan.vanderlee@wur.nl; Tel.: +31-317-481348
Received: 10 October 2018; Accepted: 14 November 2018; Published: 21 November 2018 	

Abstract: Based on farmer and value chain actor interviews, this comparative study of five
emerging dairy clusters elaborates on the upgrading of farming systems, value chains, and context
shapes transformations from semi-subsistent to market-oriented dairy farming. The main results
show unequal cluster upgrading along two intensification dimensions: dairy feeding system
and cash cropping. Intensive dairy is competing with other high-value cash crop options that
resource-endowed farmers specialize in, given conducive support service arrangements and context
conditions. A large number of drivers and co-dependencies between technical, value chain, and
institutional upgrading build up to system jumps. Transformation may take decades when market
and context conditions remain sub-optimal. Clusters can be expected to move further along initial
intensification pathways, unless actors consciously redirect course. The main theoretical implications
for debate about cluster upgrading are that co-dependencies between farming system, market, and
context factors determine upgrading outcomes; the implications for the debate about intensification
pathways are that they need to consider differences in farmer resource endowments, path dependency,
concurrency, and upgrading investments. Sustainability issues for consideration include enabling
a larger proportion of resource-poor farmers to participate in markets; enabling private input and
service provision models; attention for food safety; and climate smartness.
Keywords: agribusiness cluster; commercialization; sustainable intensification; dairy value chain;
farming system; service arrangements; Ethiopia; Kenya
1. Introduction
Upgrading of dairy farming and value chains has been promoted by policy makers and
development practitioners as a promising pathway to deal with the sustainability challenges of
mixed crop–livestock systems [1,2]. These challenges include alleviation of rural poverty, supply of
sufficient and safe food to growing urban populations, alleviation of rural poverty, and making
farming climate-smart [3]. Of all livestock farming systems in the world, mixed crop–livestock systems
produce the majority of livestock output and constitute the majority of livestock-keeping households,
often smallholders [3,4]. Therefore, prospects for these systems to become more market-oriented and
sustainably intensify are matters of academic, political, and societal interest [3,5].
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324; doi:10.3390/su10114324 171 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
Studies on the commercialization of milk production repeatedly show the complexity of the
transition from semi-subsistence to market-oriented dairy farming, which is often associated with
intensification and specialization [6–10]. For this transition, many farm practices may need innovation
in areas such as feeding, housing, and output marketing. These innovations contribute to upgrading,
defined as changes in the production process to increase productivity and added value and to improve
product quality [1,2]. They require higher input levels, for which farmers need sufficient access to
external resources, inputs, and services, both pre- and post-production [3,6]. In practice, upgrading
occurs in so-called agribusiness clusters, i.e., geographic concentrations of producers and other actors
engaged in the same subsector that facilitate the required linkages to input and output markets [11].
In clusters, the range and types of input–output connections for dairy farms and small and medium
enterprises are increased, positively influencing knowledge creation and transfer between actors,
enabling them to benefit from economies of scale (e.g., volumes of inputs and outputs) and scope
(e.g., use of imported semen and sale of milk to new markets) [12–15].
Many studies have focused on understanding the drivers and bottlenecks affecting upgrading of
dairy farming systems and value chains. These drivers include breeds; farm size; access to
capital, inputs, and services; demand for dairy products; collective action; infrastructure and
policies [7–10,16–18]. Literature yields limited analysis, however, of how these upgrading processes
facilitate dairy cluster emergence and transformation to more market-oriented dairy farming, as most
studies focus on a particular type of upgrading, on partial processes, or on single cases. Moreover,
various authors have indicated that looking at the socioeconomic context aids comprehension of
changes in agricultural practices and upgrading of farming systems [19–21]. It is apparent that
understanding the complex dynamics of dairy farming systems requires assessment of upgrading in
three domains: farming system, market, and context (including biophysical, institutional, and social
conditions) [22,23]. However, empirical analysis of these dynamics remains limited. A comprehensive
analysis of multiple clusters in comparable transition trajectories is expected to offer insights into the
upgrading dynamics, causes of variation, and interactions between the three domains.
The present study, therefore, explores how interactions of the farming system with market and
context determine upgrading pathways and outcomes. In particular, it (1) describes the present
status of regional clusters; (2) assesses upgrading pathways; and (3) analyzes how interactions affect
pathways and outcomes of upgrading. It compares five emerging clusters in the Kenyan and Ethiopian
tropical highlands that vary in upgrading status. In all these clusters, dairy farmers face the question
of whether or not to transition from ‘marketing of small surplus to local markets’ to ‘commercial
supply to wholesale chains’ [3].
By looking systemically at these interactions, this paper contributes to the debates about upgrading
in clusters, value chains, and farming systems; inclusion of smallholders in markets; system jumps;
and pathways to sustainable intensification. The results can be used in devising future scenarios for
system development and in co-design of interventions, as outlined by Martin et al. [24]. They inform
strategic upgrading options for farmers and other value chain actors by pointing at the future shape of
farm operations and the markets to supply to.
2. Methodology
2.1. Analytical Framework—Two Subsystems in Context
The analytical framework for this study considers that farming systems evolve because of the
interaction with the market and context within a cluster (Figure 1). We take the dairy farming
system within an emerging cluster as the main unit of analysis (A), from which we analyze linkages
with and influences from the other two domains—market system [25] (B) and context (C)—taking
into account inter-farm variation within clusters. Upgrading, defined above, can occur in all three
domains and in this study is respectively distinguished as technical, value chain, and institutional
upgrading [1,2]. Upgrading leads to system change (transition) and ultimately to alternative system
172
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
state (transformation). The three forms of upgrading collectively can lead to commercial dairy farming
and to the emergence of dairy clusters [26]. Transformation to a next development stage requires
significant upfront investments in new practices, technologies, innovation system, etc. [3,27].
C.
Market
Context
Upgrading
options
Dairy
farming
enabling environment
bio-physical environment
social environment
service arrangements
competitiveness
market access
B.
livelihood A.
framework
CLUSTER
Figure 1. Dairy farming system upgrading options as a result of interaction between farm, market,
and context within a dairy cluster.
We view the farming system and market system as two interacting, co-evolving systems within
dairy clusters, each of which may experience ‘system jumps’ between development stages [3]. Various
system behaviors can be expected, as described by Schiere et al. [27], depending on the specific farm,
market, and context factors that influence farmers’ livelihood strategy choices. These may include
‘adaptive cycles’, where change is episodic and periods of slow accumulation of capital (e.g., nutrients)
are punctuated by release of capital and reorganization, for example by a forest fire or an epidemic;
and ‘lock-in’, where systems get used to particular routines [27].
We build on two approaches for farming system analysis: (1) The farmers’ perspective of
Oosting et al. [3], who in their LIVCAF model describe the transition from ‘rural farmers supplying to
rural consumers’ to ‘rural farmers supplying to urban consumers’; and (2) The market quality
perspective of Duncan et al. [28], who found that well-developed markets with good procurement
and support service arrangements are key to sustainable dairy intensification, and that better market
quality is associated with a higher proportion of improved cows that are better fed (sustainability here
is used in the blended approach advocated by Mockshell and Kamanda [5]).
In all clusters, the primary driver for upgrading is the decline in livelihood due to diminishing
farm size, mainly as a result of population growth [29]. This requires intensification, i.e., the increased
use of external inputs and services to increase outputs per unit of input [6], in this case land use.
We analyze upgrading dynamics by identifying and exploring changes in farming and marketing
practices, as well as the secondary drivers that influence these; these act as accelerators of upgrading if
present and as inhibitors if absent.
Analysis of upgrading dynamics thus includes three components:
A. Farming system factors—Technical upgrading of the farming system is explored based on the
sustainable livelihoods framework [30]. This considers how farmers combine the different
types of livelihood resources they own or can get access to into livelihood activities, such as
food and cash cropping, livestock-keeping, and off-farm activities, using a variety of practices,
which often reinforce each other [31,32]. Farmers optimize several objectives into a livelihood
strategy [33]. We thus assessed dynamics in the current mixed crop–dairy farming systems by
looking at changes in the livestock and crops grown and at their functions in the farm, e.g.,
livestock for meat, milk, manure, draft power, social functions, household food, or sale; crops
for food or sale [6].
173
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
B. Farm–market interaction—Value chain upgrading changes the way a farm interacts with
the market. Following the Windmill approach of Leonardo et al. [34], we explored the
influence of the various service arrangements that determine farmers’ options for marketing
their produce. We looked at farmers’ access to markets, associated transaction costs, and fit of
service arrangements with particular degrees of market integration [13,17]. The service
arrangements offer varying degrees and combinations of the horizontal (between farmers)
and vertical (with input and output side chain actors) coordination that are necessary to
effectively integrate smallholders into markets [11,35]. Market-integrated dairy requires a
large variety of pre-production inputs and professional services, so this typology needs to cover
service arrangements on both the input and output side.
C. Context influence on farm–market interaction—Lastly, several context factors significantly
influence farm–market interaction and determine the need for institutional upgrading,
i.e., the improvement of institutional voids that constrain value chain operations [1,23].
We considered three types of factors: (1) factors in the biophysical environment, which include
land-use patterns, infrastructure (roads and utilities), climate and weather, animal and crop
pests and diseases, risks of natural and human-induced disasters (such as droughts and
wars), seasonality of production, and environmental impact of farming, including effects of
agro-chemical use [18,36]; (2) factors in the enabling context, i.e., the regulatory framework
elements and their enforcement (such as agricultural policies, subsidies, access to finance,
property rights, and quality standards) that determine whether the institutional context enables
upgrading [16,23,29,37,38]; and (3) factors in the social environment, i.e., social identity and
(dairy) farming history [39].
2.2. Data Collection and Analysis
Case study sites were selected from the highlands of Ethiopia and Kenya, home to significant
dairy production on a large number of smallholder mixed farms and a smaller number of mediumand
large-scale dairy farms. The two countries differ in terms of sociopolitical context. The presence,
reliability, and attractiveness of market service arrangements for pre- and post-production inputs and
services vary between and within countries, leading to differences in market quality [28].
Sub-regional administrative units of roughly similar size were chosen as starting points for
cluster selection: Ethiopian Zones and Kenyan Counties. Based on a scoping exercise and team
knowledge, in each country two emerging clusters were selected that have good and comparable
agro-ecological potential for dairying (located between 1750 and 3000 m above sea level) but differ in
market quality (see Figure 2). Milk production differs widely between clusters. For example, while
Nyandarua and Nandi counties are roughly equivalent in terms of arable land, human population, and
cattle herd size, the annual milk production in Nyandarua is nearly three times that of Nandi [40,41]
(see Supplementary Material S1 for more detail). Due to two distinctly different milk-marketing
situations within Nandi County, Nandi was divided into two clusters. To capture the within-cluster
variety in market quality, six villages were selected per cluster, with the exception of East Shoa
and Nyandarua clusters, where three and nine villages were selected respectively (see Figure 2 for
location of study sites). Villages vary in access to rural service centers and end markets, with one-third
each having good, medium, and poor access to a service center, located at zero, one, and two hours’
walk from a service center respectively.
Interviews with farmer groups and with other value chain actors occurred between September
2016 and May 2017. Dairy farmer group interviews (FGIs) were held in all thirty villages, with group
numbers ranging from five to eleven participants, averaging eight. In Arsi, East Shoa and Nyandarua
clusters, all farmers who had been interviewed as part of a previous study [42] were invited; in Nandi
North and Nandi South, a new sample was invited to participate in FGIs. Farmers were purposively
sampled to represent the range of dairy farm sizes in the village. The FGIs used a questionnaire with
open questions for discussion and a number of participatory ranking exercises, focusing on both
174
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
current situation and historic developments. The latter used either importance ranking or the ten
seed technique [43], which was modified to use twenty seeds in case answers exceeded five items.
Farm classification categories offered by FGIs were harmonized, as categories such as ‘small scale’ and
‘medium scale’ are context-specific; some categories were combined. Questions about dairy experience,
farm acreage, number of dairy cows and main crops grown were included in the FGIs in Nandi;
for other clusters, these data were derived from previous dairy farmer interviews [42].
Figure 2. Map of Ethiopia and Kenya with study clusters and study sites.
For value chain actor interviews (VCAIs), dairy actors were selected by using information from
earlier farmer interviews [42] and by snowballing. A broad range of value chain actors was covered:
private and public suppliers of pharmaceutics, agro-chemicals, semen, feeds, forage, and equipment;
private and public providers of artificial insemination (AI), veterinary, extension, and financial services;
milk and butter traders, transporters, and dairy processors; cooperative societies and farmer groups;
and development agencies and knowledge institutes (see Supplementary Material S1 for portrayal of
dairy value chains in Ethiopia and Kenya). VCAIs numbered 118 in total (18 in East Shoa, 20 in Arsi,
43 in Nyandarua, 18 in Nandi North, 10 in Nandi South and 9 with multi-county actors in Kenya).
Secondary factors assessed in the FGIs and VCAIs—which act as drivers of upgrading and
transition if present and as bottlenecks if absent—were derived from literature [11,16,18,28,30,44–46]:
• Farming system internal factors: Changes in farmer livelihood strategies, practices, outcomes,
and resources (also called capitals or assets) including natural (land acreage and soils, water,
climate and weather, herd size and genetics, functions of and interaction between livestock and
175
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
crops used); economic (capital); physical (farm structures, equipment); human (labor, knowledge
and skills); and social resources (networks, groups)
• Market factors: Dairy pre- and post-production service arrangements and service offer;
farmer utilization and satisfaction; demand for dairy products (product, price, place); scarcity
of inputs, services, and production factors; key marketing institutions, such as competition,
role division in service supply, availability of market information, actor relationships, and milk
quality assurance
• Context factors: Collective action; dairy history and identity; consumer preferences;
conducive infrastructure; access to production factors; regulatory space for private
services; policy priority/instruments, public services, and subsidies; social inclusion and
environmental impact.
Analysis—FGI and VCAI recordings were transcribed. Along with notes made during FGIs,
they were analyzed in Atlas.ti using secondary factors as codes. Differences between clusters were
rated by the first author based on data analysis. Results from FGI ranking exercises were translated
into percentages and tabulated along with quantitative data; simple statistics were calculated.
3. Results
3.1. Cluster Description
The five clusters selected are briefly described using the schematic positioning of their
specialization and upgrading dynamics along two axes (Figure 3): feeding system and cash crop types.
These axes denote the variation and recent upgrading in farming systems that, under pressure of land
shortage, intensify in different ways along two directions (as observed in clusters studied): a feeding
system transition from ‘grazing with crop residue use’ (low dairy intensity—Ld) to ‘zero-grazing with
planted forage’ (high dairy intensity—Hd) and a cash crop transition from ‘grains’ (low cropping
intensity—Lc) to ‘horticulture and/or perennials’ (high cropping intensity—Hc).
The clusters are thus characterized as (Table 1):
I. Dairy clusters—HdHc Nandi North and Nyandarua gradually specialize to dairy and
become increasingly market-oriented; there is significant milk collection by cooperatives and
processors; increasingly sophisticated types of service arrangements exist; other cash crops or
livestock products are produced as a second activity; Nyandarua enjoys high demand for milk
from processors and traders; 98% of the dairy farm herd is either crossbred or purebred exotic;
potatoes come second after dairy; Nandi North has more non-dairy farmers and more mediumand
large-scale farms; the choice of dairy over horticulture or perennials is still tentative.
II. Grain and fattening cluster—LdLc Arsi specializes in barley and wheat as cash crops, enabled
by farm sizes that still allow such relatively extensive crops; for a long time, poor roads
limited market access for dairy; just before roads improved around 2012, farmers adopted
improved grain crop packages promoted by government and agribusiness; as a result, farmers
focus on livestock activities, other than dairy, that utilize cash crop residues, but do not require
daily marketing, i.e., beef, mutton, and heifer production; dairy development interventions
have been occurring since the 1950s.
III. Perennial and horticultural crop cluster—LdHc Nandi South saw a diminishing role for dairy,
as a move to high-value/ha activities occurred; farmers specialize in tea due to better support
services; milk collection is almost only informal; cattle are being replaced by small livestock;
semi-subsistence farming with extensive livestock and off-farm labor continues in areas
unsuitable for tea and vegetable marketing.
IV. Mixed cluster—LdHc East Shoa, some farmers specialize in dairy (Type I), others in horticulture
(Type III), while in more remote areas grains prevail (Type II). In the dairy herds of interviewed
farmers, only 34% of animals are crossbred or purebred exotic; both subsectors benefit from
176
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
fresh food demand in the nearby metropolis; competition for land occurs between the two and
with export-oriented flower farming and urban development.
In all of the five clusters, intensification pressure is high. Over the past decades, farm sizes
have shrunk due to customary intergenerational subdivision of land. In addition, the Ethiopian
clusters reported land scarcity due to significant withdrawal of farm land for town and infrastructure
development (past two decades) and due to allocation of land to state farms (LdLc Arsi cluster, 1980s)
and flower farms (LdHc East Shoa cluster, 1990s–2000s).
Hc horticulture,
perennials
grazing & zero-grazing &
crop-residues planted forage
Lc grains
Ld Hd
ARSI
NANDI
SOUTH
NYAN
DARUA
EAST
SHOA
NANDI
NORTH
Figure 3. Schematic positioning of specializing clusters along cash crop and feeding system
intensity scales.
Table 1. Key characteristics of dairy farming and marketing in five Ethiopian and Kenyan clusters.
Country: Ethiopia Kenya
Cluster Type: LdLc LdHc LdHc HdHc HdHc
Characteristics Cluster Name: Arsi East Shoa Nandi S Nandi N Nyandarua
Average farm size (ha) 3.2 4.0 0.8 1.6 2.9
Proportion improved cattle 55% 34% n.a. 95% 98%
Feeding system (1) grazing
and
residues
grazing
and
residues
grazing
and
residues
residues +
planted
fodder
residues +
planted
fodder
Main cash crop(s) (2) grains various tea various Potatoes
Main marketing channel traders processors
and coops
traders coops coops
Milk demand low medium low medium high
Average est. milk sales (US$/yr) 859 2384 1621
Input service offer low low–med. low med–high high
Main service providers public public private private private
(1) In all clusters, urban farms mostly practice zero-grazing. (2) ‘Various’ indicates that no crop is dominant.
3.2. Analysis of Upgrading in Three Domains
Figure 4 lists the main secondary factors that were identified in this study as influencing upgrading
dynamics in the clusters. Upgrading in all three domains is most advanced in HdHc clusters, especially
in Nyandarua, as Table 2 shows. While a number of context conditions in LdHc Nandi South are good,
specialization toward high-value cash crops is at the cost of upgrading in dairy. In LdHc East Shoa,
competition with cash crops explains upgrading limitations for dairy. In LdLc Arsi, market constraints
177
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
clearly affect dairy prospects. In the latter two clusters, less favorable context factors also dampen
upgrading. Observed dynamics related to these factors are described in the next sections, following
steps A–C from Figure 1. Factors with less apparent effect on upgrading dynamics were considered,
but generally not described. A more detailed description of upgrading dynamics in each cluster is
included as Supplementary Material S2.
drivers/
bottlenecks:
acreage and herd size; cattle functions
farmer knowledge and skills
complementarity dairy with other crops
product demand (type, volume, quality)
input and output service offer
competitiveness dairy vs. other activities
collective action, dairy history, identity
consumer preferences
conducive infrastructure; access to finance
regulatory space for private services
policy priority/instruments, public services
Farming system
internal drivers
Market drivers Context drivers
Technical upgrading Market upgrading Institutional upgrading
specialization in dairy role redefinition privatepublic
specialization in high-value crops/livestock enabling private sector services
investments in dairy genotypes contracting and quality assurance infrastructure development
investments in feeding competition between service providers upgraded financial services
investments in housing transformation farmer organizations quality standards for products
investments in animal health care
evidenced
by:
specialization in functions
margins per hectare for cash crops
competing with dairy
proportion of dairy breeds in dairy herd
intensity forage production and preservation
level of investments in animal health care,
cow comfort, fodder storage
sophistication of input and
output service arrangements
vertical and horizontal coordination
dairy product range
access to credit and factors
demand for quality products
status of infrastructure
status policies affecting dairy and support
service provision
attention for milk quality
upgrading
types:
more sophisticated input and
output service arrangements
Figure 4. Causal relationships between secondary drivers and upgrading types.
Table 2. Technical, value chain and institutional upgrading in five clusters.
Country: Ethiopia Kenya
Cluster type: LdLc LdHc LdHc HdHc HdHc
Cluster Name:
Arsi
East
Shoa
Nandi
South
Nandi
North
Nyan
Upgrading Type darua
Technical upgrading
- specialization in ‘dairy as business’ + ++ + ++ +++
- investments in dairy genotypes ++ ++ + ++ +++
- investments in feeding + + + ++ ++
- investments in housing + + + ++ +++
- investments in animal health care + ++ + ++ +++
- specialization in high-value crops/livestock i.o. dairy ++ ++ +++ ++ +
Value chain upgrading
- more sophisticated input and output service arrangements + + ++ +++
- contracting and quality assurance ++ + +++ +++
- competition in service provision ++ + ++ +++
- transformation farmer organizations + + ++ +++
Institutional upgrading
- role redefinition private–public + ++ +++
- enabling private sector services + + + ++ +++
- infrastructure development + ++ ++ ++ +++
- upgraded financial services + + ++ +++ +++
- quality standards for products + ++ ++
N.B. Number of + denotes degree of upgrading: one + means some upgrading, additional + means more upgrading
than in other clusters; no + means no upgrading identified.
178
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
The examined clusters are under land-scarce conditions, which means that farm acreage and
stocking rate (livestock units per hectare) are key indicators to observe when assessing intensification
and upgrading status. A number of additional parameters—suggested by this study as potential
indicators for upgrading in the three domains that score resource base, intensity of production, and
market—are shown in Figure 4.
3.2.1. Farming System Factors (A)
This section describes technical upgrading dynamics identified in the farming systems domain.
The data in Table 3 offers insight into the ongoing changes in farming and the similarities and
differences between clusters.
Specialization in dairy: smaller herds and less cattle functions—With farm size dropping to
an average of three to four hectares, farmers in the Ethiopian FGIs reported that they specialize and
reduce herd sizes, focusing on productivity rather than number of animals by crossbreeding with
exotic dairy types: ‘Two improved cows compare to ten local cows, but they need intensive care.’
Farmers did not consider classification based on cattle number or land acreage to be meaningful;
rather, they classified dairy farms based on market orientation and management level (see Table 3).
This points to the ongoing transition in cattle functions in the farming system, from multipurpose
(with local cattle for draft power, beef, manure, savings, social functions such as dowry, household
consumption, and a small surplus for market) to more dairy-oriented, with fewer but specialized
dairy cows. In Kenya, where average farm size is already well below three hectares and nearly all
dairy cows have exotic blood, farmers specialize further to increase income per hectare. Breed choice
is mainly between Friesian (higher producer) and Ayrshire (more disease-resistant and less heavy
feeder). Entrepreneurial entrants, who have accumulated resources through employment or business,
are investing in medium- to large-scale commercial farms and in advanced technology for feeding,
housing, reproduction, etc., but often without commensurate investment in high quality farm labor.
Specialization in high-value crops/livestock/off-farm activities—Due to ongoing pressure on
land, farmers reported that they choose livestock types and cash crops with shorter maturation time
and higher margin per hectare, to offset rising land costs. Choice of crops/livestock types depends on
how available options ‘fit’ within the farm, market, and context, including personal preferences and
identity: especially in the Nandi clusters, farmers consider cattle-keeping an inalienable part of their
identity. This brings important experience and skills, but also explains why farmers continue with
dairy cattle even where the farm size barely allows for it (see Table 3) and when competitive advantages
of other livestock and crops as livelihood options outweigh those of dairy. Until some decades ago,
sale of fresh milk and dairy products was subject to taboos (e.g., in LdLc Arsi cluster) that are only
gradually losing their impact as milk undergoes commodity individuation [47].
While dairy is being upgraded in HdHc Nyandarua, HdHc Nandi North and LdHc East Shoa
clusters, it is being replaced by smaller species (such as goats, sheep, chickens, or rabbits) in LdHc
Nandi South and by heifer production and/or fattening in LdLc Arsi and remote parts of Nandi and
Nyandarua. Farmers increase roots/tubers/bananas and horticulture (in all clusters but Arsi) and
perennials (tea, fruit trees and sugarcane, in Nandi), largely at the expense of grains. Due to more
favorable market service arrangements for tea, since the 1980s 30–40% of farmers in LdHc Nandi South
cluster have planted tea; this crowds out dairy, as tea plantations do not offer edible crop residues
nor sufficient space for forage. In the Nandi clusters, mechanized land preparation is being replaced
by manual work due to declining farm sizes and shift to perennials. In Ethiopia, draft animals are
starting to be replaced by equipment such as broad bed makers and combine harvesters, due to
scarcity of feed resources for draft animals. Nevertheless, the presence of draft animals explains why
only one in three animals in the dairy herd is a dairy cow, compared to two in three in Kenya.
179
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
Table 3. Farm characteristics for the five clusters.
Clusters (with sub-Counties/Districts Where
Study Sites Are Located)
No. of
Villages
(FGI Part.)
Management Level
(% of Dairy Farms) (1)
Farm
Size (ha)
(2)
Herd
Size
Milking
Cows as
% of herd
% Improved
Cattle in Herd
(2)
Main crops (2),(3)
(Dominant Crops
in Bold)
% hh
w/Off-farm
Activ. (2)
Non-Dairy
Farms
(% of hh.)
Low Medium High
Breed type Local
Local
and
improved
Improved
Market focus Within
village Mixed Outside
village
LdLc Arsi (Limu-Bilbilo and Digalu-Tiyo) 6 (42) 61 39 3.2 6.5 31 55 Cereals, pulses,
vegetables 42 13
LdHc East Shoa (Ada’a) 3 (21) 67 33 4.0 7.6 31 34 Cereals, pulses, oil
seed, veg. 35 40
Average for clusters Ethiopia 64 36 3.4 6.9 31 45 40 27
Farm Size (% of Dairy Farms)
Very
sm. Small Medium Large
Farm size (ha) <2.5 <2.5 2.5–8 >8
No.of dairy cows 1–2 3–5 6–20 >20
LdHc Nandi South (Aldai, Nandi South) 6 (63) 78 16 6 0 0.8 2.2 66 n.a. Tea, maize, RTB,
veg., fruits n.a. 19
HdHc Nandi North (Chesumei, Nandi North) 6 (47) 76 20 4 1.6 3.3 64 n.a. Maize, sugarc., tea,
veg., fruits n.a. 25
HdHc Nyandarua (Ol Kalou, Kipipiri) 9 (63) 92 8 0 2.9 4.3 65 98 Potatoes, cereals,
pulses, veg. 40 13
Average for clusters Kenya 87 11 1 1.8 3.3 65 19
(1) In the Ethiopian clusters, FGIs distinguished between ‘low’,‘medium’ and ‘high’ management levels; numbers for the first two categories have been combined, as not all villages
identified an intermediate management level. (2) From dairy farmer interviews for East Shoa (n = 37), Arsi (n = 85), Nyandarua (n = 91) [42]; from focus group discussions for
Nandi North and South; different methodologies may affect results; farm size in Nyandarua was 2.88 ha according to FGI, 3.59 ha according to dairy farmer interviews [42].
(3) RTB = roots/tubers/bananas; here it includes Irish potatoes, sweet potatoes, arrowroot, cassava and bananas.
180
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
Table 4. Support service arrangements and input and output service offer in five clusters.
Output Service Arrangements with Integrated Input Services (If Any) Input Service Arrangements (5)
Service Delivery Model: Local
Market
Trader/Restaur.
(1),(2)
Self-help
group (3) Cooperative (4) Processor Cooperative
Company (4)
Processor
w/Services Independ. Suppliers Dept. of Livestock Dev.
Agencies
Arrangement type: Spot
market
Relational
contract
Formal
contract Multilateral contract Formal
contract
Equity
participation Vertical integration Formal contract Public services Various
Prevalence in:
Ethiopia
Arsi ++ ++ + +/- ++ +
East Shoa + + + ++ +/- + ++ +
Kenya
Nandi
South +/- ++ +/- + +/- +/-
Nandi
North +/- + + ++ + ++ +/- ++ +/- +/-
Nyandarua +/- + + ++ + ++ + +++ + +/-
Output services offered to farmers
Collection from farm + + +/- +/- +/- +/-
Chilling +/- +/- +/- +/- +/-
Transportation MCC to plant +/- + +/- +
Quality testing at collection +/- + + +
Input services offered to farmers Eth Ken Eth Ken
Farm advice +/- +/- + +/- +/-
AI +/- +/- + + +/-
Veterinary services +/- +/- +/- + + +
Feed, forage, and drugs +/- + + + +/-
Linking to input suppliers +/- +/- +/- + +/-
Facilitate access to finance +/- + +/- +/-
Input advancing (on credit) +/- + +/-
+ = commonly provided; number of + denotes relative dominance of service arrangement; +/- = provided by some actors only or to some farmers only. (1) Direct supply to restaurants
primarily by peri-urban farmer. (2) In Ethiopia: butter traders; in Kenya: private milk collectors buying from farmers and selling to retailers, restaurants, consumers, and MCCs.
(3) In Ethiopia we encountered no farmer groups (less formal than cooperatives) supplying milk. (4) Some cooperatives also process, which adds additional output services. (5) In both
countries, private companies, public agencies and NGOs/development projects play a role in provision of (subsidized) inputs and services. As these affect other service arrangements,
we include them as separate categories.
181
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
Farmers reported an increase of private business activities and casual labor in agriculture,
construction, and transportation services. Around 40% of farmers indicated that they are engaged in
off-farm activities, primarily in formal employment, private business, and trade. Households with
jobs in the public or civil society sector are generally involved in private business as well, in which
they invest their salaries.
Changes in dairy practices—The specialization mentioned above plays out in a number of
‘technology upgrades’ in terms of farming practices. Only some farmers make these changes, and there
are large differences between clusters. The highest proportions of farmers who make changes are in
HdHc Nyandarua and Nandi North clusters and in dairy farms in or close to towns in all clusters:
• Investments in dairy genotypes using AI or improved bulls. This breed-replacement process is
ongoing in Ethiopia and mostly completed in Kenya; except for in some remote, barely specialized
villages, farmers in Kenya overwhelmingly keep purebred or crossbred Ayrshire, Friesian, Jersey,
and Guernsey
• Investments in feeding practices follow a standard pattern over time: (1) grazing and crop residues
are supplemented with industrial by-products and mixed rations; (2) grazing land is paddocked;
(3) investments are made in production and preservation of planted forages such as oats, maize,
and Napier and Rhodes grass to counter forage shortages
• Investments in animal housing in Ethiopia include new barns to house improved breeds; in Kenya,
zero-grazing units and feed storage are used when intensifying further
• Investments in animal health care increase; due to the failure of communal cattle dips to
control tick-borne diseases, in Kenya many farmers have moved to individual spraying
and some vaccination for East Coast Fever; treatment by veterinary workers is increasing,
as is self-administration of drugs purchased from agro-veterinary shops, especially de-wormers;
in Ethiopia, farmers use government veterinary personnel, who often provide better private
service on the side.
3.2.2. Farm–Market Interaction (B)
The data in Tables 4 and 5 reflect upgrading dynamics stemming from the interaction between
farming system and market, which become particularly clear when comparing clusters. As input
service arrangements are important in more intensive dairy and become increasingly integrated with
output service arrangements, Table 4 includes both input and output service arrangements identified.
This description follows the value chain upgrading categories of Table 2.
More sophisticated input and output service arrangements, tailored to farmer
types—Dominant service arrangements range from local markets and traders in the limited
market conditions of LdLc Arsi and Nandi South clusters to cooperative companies and processors,
with increasingly integrated services in HdHc Nyandarua. In LdHc East Shoa cluster, processors
and cooperatives are replacing the first two output service arrangements, as yet without significant
upgrading in input service arrangements. In HdHc Nandi North and Nyandarua clusters, service
arrangements of cooperative companies (i.e., upgraded cooperative societies) are being upgraded to
integrated input and output service packages. Processors here, who source from farmer organizations
and larger farms, are experimenting with integrated input and output service arrangements as well,
more so in HdHc Nyandarua where competition for milk and service provision is fiercer.
Service arrangement use by farmers depends on their market integration and milk sales volumes.
Table 5 shows how different service delivery models cater to different farmer categories. Interviews
revealed a strong relation between farmers’ choice of service arrangements and farm household
resource level, which in turn is related to off-farm activities. For resource-poor farmers, payment
conditions are most important. They mainly sell to traders, as they need today’s milk money for
today’s food, and they often lack the cash to acquire external inputs and services. Smallholders with
more resources tend to sell to cooperatives and processors (sometimes through self-help groups),
to benefit from larger two-weekly or monthly payments that can be used for inputs and investments.
182
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
However, they usually sell at least some milk to traders to benefit from higher prices and to satisfy
immediate cash needs. In Kenya, the resource-endowed smallholders selling to cooperatives can
benefit from input and service advancing through widespread ‘check-off’ systems, in which costs
for inputs and services advanced are deducted from the next milk payment. Medium-scale farms in
both countries seem to use any of the output service arrangements and mainly consider price, buyer
dependability and transaction costs.
Table 5. Factors affecting choice of service arrangement by farmer category.
Service Arrangement: Local
Market
Trader +
Restaur. Self-help group Cooperative Processor Cooperative
company Processor w/ Serv.
Dominant farm size Smallholders
(peri-urban)
Resource-poor
smallholders
Resource-endowed
smallholders
Resource-endowed
smallholders
Larger farmers,
organized
smallholders
Resource-endowed
smallholders
Larger farmers,
organized
smallholders
Factors affecting choice
Payment period (days) (1) direct negotiable <45 <45 <45 <45 <45
Farmgate price (US/kg) (2)
- Ethiopia: milk 0.35–0.90 0.55–0.75 - 0.35–0.65 0.35–0.70 - -
- Ethiopia: butter 3–12 7–13 - - - - -
- Kenya: milk 0.30–0.45 0.30–0.50 0.28–0.37 0.26–0.34 0.26–0.37 0.26–0.34 0.26–0.37
Milk buyer advances - cash - (inputs) - inputs inputs
Proximity to services <1 h farmgate ——————- depending on location ————————-
(1) With the exception of one processor in Kenya, whose terms are 90 days. (2) Using 2016 prices and exchange
rates of ETB 20:USD 1 and KES 100:USD 1; incl. dairy farmer interv. data [42].
Interviews in both of the countries further indicated that increases in productivity and marketed
milk volumes are necessary to be able to pay for the extra inputs and services. Farmers in Ethiopia
mentioned a break-even point of 9 L/cow/day.
Chain contracting arrangements and quality assurance—Low levels of trust in the chain form a
strong inhibitor to upgrading, especially in Kenya. This is evidenced by significant ‘side-selling’ of
milk: farmers and farmer organizations hedge marketing risks by selling to multiple clients. Processors
do the same by contracting fixed volumes with suppliers. The result is a supply network rather than a
supply chain, with associated high production and transaction costs. Marketing is volume- rather than
quality-driven. Marketing relationships are complicated by the stark seasonality of production, with a
slump in production during the dry season, and by the seasonality of consumption due to Orthodox
Christian fasting seasons in Ethiopia.
Competition in service provision—In Ethiopian clusters, government agencies are the primary
input and service providers. Although the main product in LdHc Nandi South, Kenya, is fresh milk
rather than butter, the output service arrangements are unsophisticated, as in LdLc Arsi. Stronger
competition leads to more sophisticated arrangements with higher degrees of horizontal and vertical
coordination, as observed in HdHc Nyandarua cluster. Here, improved service levels were reported
in milk contracting, milk collection, value chain financing, feed supply, drug supply, and AI services,
but less so in curative health care and hay supply. Use of own bulls rather than AI services is
diminishing, but still common in all clusters, pointing to issues with the quality of AI services
(proportion of farmers using bulls is lowest in HdHc Nyandarua, at around 40%).
Transformation of farmer organizations—The poor track record of cooperatives in both countries
in terms of governance, efficiency, and sustainability makes many farmers wary of investing heavily
in them; many regard cooperatives primarily as channels for public and NGO subsidies. The more
entrepreneurial smallholders in Kenya circumvent these issues by forming less formal ‘self-help’
groups that aggregate milk and supply directly to processors. Cooperative companies, generally
initiated with support from development agencies such as Heifer and partners, add a variety of
services to these inputs, including access to credit lines (see Table 4). In Ethiopia, such systems are
much less developed.
3.2.3. Context Influence on Farm–Market Interaction (C)
This section describes identified upgrading dynamics stemming from interaction with the context.
Institutional upgrading (or the absence of it) may have a synergistic, antagonistic, or inconsequential
183
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
influence on technical and value chain upgrading. The main context factors identified in interviews
are presented in Table 6 and are described here following the institutional upgrading categories of
Table 2. A more elaborate description of policy dynamics is included in Supplementary Material S3.
Impact of role division between private and public actors on service arrangements—Both
countries have a turbulent history of public influence on agricultural service provision, contributing to
large changes in Kenya and stagnation in Ethiopia. In Ethiopia, public actors play an overriding role in
access to inputs, services, and land. In Kenya, 25 years of significant policy changes have affected dairy
in diverse ways: very significant cuts in public services in the early 1990s resulted in a collapse of the
dairy sector, evidenced by the bankruptcy of many cooperatives and the state processor KCC (1999);
market liberalization policy only gradually resulted in private service delivery [48]; and the enabling
environment now varies from county to county [49].
In both countries, many interviewees complained about the inconsistency and inadequacy of
public services for dairy. Minimization of dairy extension services in Kenya in the 1990s resulted in
declining farmer skills and ultimately in declining yields. Public agencies have a (virtual) monopoly on
vaccination for notifiable diseases in Kenya and on vaccination, AI, veterinary, and extension services
in Ethiopia. The regulatory gaps for private AI, animal health services, and quality assurance of feed
and the low policy priority for dairy compared to crops and meat received strong negative feedback.
Relatively large positive impact was attributed to development projects.
In both countries, governments use subsidies to promote uptake of more market-oriented practices
and to make services more accessible to farmers in remote locations and/or with fewer resources.
In Kenya, interviewees mentioned many downsides to subsidized services. In Ethiopia, public
monopolies on most inputs and services lead to an insensitivity toward demand, favoritism and
lack of a level playing field for private providers. In both countries, subsidies seem to have created
dependency on chemical fertilizers, leading to soil fertility issues.
Space for private sector service provision—The above indicates a number of bottlenecks for
private service provision, even in Kenya where market liberalization is standing policy. In Ethiopia,
regulatory space for private service providers primarily results in private agro-input shops (feed, drugs)
and milk/butter trade; in Kenya, it results in agro-input shops and milk trade, as well as AI, veterinary,
and advisory services. In both countries various business licenses are required, but monitoring of
licenses is lax in Kenya.
Infrastructure development—Infrastructure, in terms of roads and utilities, was improving in
all clusters. Market access for remote villages was more restricted by poor roads in Ethiopia than it
was for remote villages in Kenya, as was least restricted in HdHc Nyandarua, where authorities have
invested more in roads. While road upgrading in LdLc Arsi did improve access to markets, in LdHc
East Shoa cluster it was mostly seen as taking away land from farming.
Financial services, factor access and information supply—In Ethiopia, poor access to finance
is a significant bottleneck for upgrading of dairy farms and support services; farmers primarily rely
on community savings and community credit institutions such as ‘ekub’. This is less of an issue in
Kenya, where people who are connected to more formal value chains benefit from chain financing
mechanisms, cooperative savings and credit institutions, and easier access to bank loans. Capping of
interest rates at 14% per year for agricultural loans was applauded by Kenyan farmers. Access to labor
is impeded by the image of dairy as involving much heavy and dirty labor. Access to information is
increased by the presence of private advisory service providers next to public ones, and local language
radio and TV programs about agriculture are highly appreciated by farmers.
Quality standards for products—In Kenya, demand for dairy products is strong and growing
(annual consumption exceeds 110 L/capita [50]). Consumer preference for raw milk gives the informal
market a strong advantage. Its market share remains over 70%, despite many decades of formal chain
development efforts and presence of product standards [50,51]. In Ethiopia, annual consumption is
much lower, at around 20 L/capita, and the informal market trades over 98% of the volume [50]; here,
cooperatives and processors find it difficult to deal with seasonality of consumer demand resulting
184
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
from long fasting seasons (on top of seasonality of production), although interviewees may have been
using this as a metaphor for the difficult business climate.
Table 6. Conduciveness of context factors in five study clusters.
Country: Ethiopia Kenya
Cluster Type: LdLc LdHc LdHc HdHc HdHc
Context factors Cluster Name: Arsi East Shoa Nandi S Nandi N Nyandarua
Biophysical
Climate/weather +++ ++ ++ ++ +++
Absence of disease threat + + ++
Infrastructure + + + ++ +++
Enabling environment
Policies promoting dairy + ++ +++
Policy space for private service prov. + + ++++ ++++ ++++
Public disease prevention services ++ ++ + + +
Research–extension–farmer linkages ++ ++ + + +
Enforcement of service quality + ++ +
Enforcement of milk quality + + +
Access to finance + ++ ++
Chain upgrading facilitators ++ ++ ++ ++ ++
Social environment
Dairy history and culture +++ +++ +++ +++ +++
Dairy seen as business + + ++ +++ ++++
Milk consumption + + +++ +++ +++
Land availability + + +
Labour availability +++ ++ ++ ++ ++
N.B. The number of +’s indicate how conducive the situation is in comparison with other clusters.
4. Discussion
4.1. Present Upgrading Status of Farming and Clusters
This comparative assessment between clusters clearly draws out important differences in
upgrading of farming systems that emanate from farm–market–context interactions. It reveals that all
five clusters show clear evidence of technical, value chain and/or institutional upgrading of ‘typical’
semi-subsistence mixed crop–livestock systems to more market-oriented systems. The need for higher
returns per hectare requires specialization and commercialization, in order to maintain or increase
farm yields and household incomes. Technical, value chain and institutional upgrading are most
pronounced in the HdHc clusters and least in the LdLc cluster, where the market system showed
little to no upgrading (see Table 2). Degrees of upgrading are clearly related to secondary drivers that
act as accelerators and inhibitors.
The current status of each cluster is the result of diverging pathways along dairy feeding system
and cash crop intensification dimensions. These lead to increased market orientation of farmer
livelihood strategies, marketed volume, and use of pre- and post-production inputs and services
(Figure 3), but for different commodities and to different degrees. More intensive dairy can thus be
considered to be one of the high-value ‘cash crop’ options that farmers can specialize in when market
and context conditions are right; so are other intensive livestock activities, such as commercial
poultry. This makes the Windmill approach, postulated for crop commodities by Leonardo et al. [34],
to be applicable to livestock commodities as well. However, ample attention is needed for input service
arrangements, which need to be especially elaborate for livestock ventures.
4.2. Cluster Upgrading Pathways Toward the Future
Cluster upgrading directions diverge as a result of different specialization choices. The different
clusters react differently to the primary driver of land-use intensification, which requires higher
185
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
productivity and higher returns per hectare. Choice of either intensive dairy or horticultural and
perennial cash crops will be at the expense of the other option (LdHc vs. HdHc). Most clusters can be
expected to move further along the intensification pathway type started, unless actors consciously
redirect course:
• HdHc—Dairy clusters. Dairy is competitive against other commodities; service arrangements
become increasingly sophisticated and competitive; private and/or cooperative actors play a
strong role. Continued development of HdHc clusters toward dairy seems likely, provided
upgrading in farming, market, and context progresses. Further specialization may lead to singular
focus on dairy (HdLc). This expected further upgrading of the HdHc dairy clusters contradicts
modeling outcomes of Herrero et al. [4], who only foresaw such upgrading for peri-urban dairy
in Kenya, and may warrant review of their modeling assumptions.
• LdLc—Grain and fattening cluster. Strong public policy directions and public–private
collaboration made grains in LdLc Arsi cluster more competitive than dairy. Future development
of LdLc clusters toward dairy depends on serious value chain and institutional upgrading, if dairy
is to effectively compete with cash crops. For the time being, available farmer expertise and
presence of improved dairy breeds in LdLc Arsi keep the door open for upgrading of dairy,
but heifer production and commercial forage production for supply to other dairy clusters
seem to be more attractive alternatives. These alternative opportunities are enhanced by (1) the
competition for fodder between dairy and draft animals in Ethiopia; and (2) the low capacity of
intensifying tropical dairy systems to produce sufficient replacement stock and fodder [52], which
results in high prices for dairy heifers and fodder.
• LdHc—Perennial and horticultural crop cluster. Severe land scarcity affects these clusters,
with specialization toward perennials, horticulture, and intensive livestock. Due to strong
path dependency, further upgrading and specialization of LdHc clusters around perennials and
horticulture are most likely, along with intensive non-dairy livestock-keeping in areas not suitable
for perennials and horticulture. It will be interesting to watch whether farmers with a strong
‘cattle identity’ will give up dairy.
Prospects for the remaining LdHc East Shoa cluster are still uncertain. It could either move toward
intensive dairy, toward horticulture or toward other high-value commodity options. Upgrading
prospects for dairy depend on how relative competitiveness of each venture is affected by dynamics
in its respective markets (e.g., conduciveness of service arrangements for each option) and context
(e.g., spatial planning and enabling policies).
An interesting next step would be to quantify the degree of specialization and intensification of
(dairy) farming in clusters, building on recent work in Europe andWest Africa [53,54].
4.3. Upgrading Options at Farm Level
To explore upgrading options for dairy farmers in different clusters, we draw attention to path
dependency, farmer feasibility space and aspirations. Path dependency [27] as system behavior applies at
cluster, value chain, and farm level: past investments in an established commodity favor its current
competitiveness. A ‘new’ commodity still needs to build up its capitals and is competing against
stakes in the established commodity. This path dependency becomes stronger the more intensive the
competitive crop or livestock activity. When dairy is being compared against tea and against barley
as an investment choice, investments in technical and value chain upgrading for dairy need to be
higher to beat tea than to beat barley, as tea has a higher expected return per hectare. Waithaka et al. [55]
suggested that the intensification of farms in Nandi South could increase milk production on purchased
feed, but the present study shows that in this LdHc cluster, the suite of service arrangements required
for entrepreneurial dairy are lacking, whereas they are present for tea. While path dependency is
expected to be stronger for HdHc and LdHc than for LdLc type clusters, it can influence upgrading
pathways in any cluster. For example, the ongoing reliance on draft oxen rather than on machines
186
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
in Ethiopia appears to be a significant barrier for transition to market-oriented dairy, as a large
proportion of the fodder biomass is fed to oxen and (local) oxen dams, limiting fodder availability for
dairy cows.
Differences in farmer livelihood strategies help explain the presence of multiple types of service
arrangements coexisting within the same cluster (Table 4). These cater to different farmer groups:
the supply conditions of the formal arrangements are suiting resource-endowed farmers with more
intensive dairy farming but are unfavorable to resource-poor farmers (Table 5). To them the informal
arrangements offer a flexible and convenient market outlet with a competitive milk price, at an input
level they can afford (Table 5). For policy makers and development actors who aim to connect
more smallholders to (formal) markets, an important consideration should be that farmer livelihood
strategies are the result of feasibility space and aspirations, which do not necessarily go hand in hand.
Farmers’ feasibility space expands along with their resource base, access to production factors,
presence of service arrangements, and conducive context factors [27]. Resource-endowed farmers can
intensify crop or livestock activities; utilize upgraded service arrangements; and access land, labor,
credit, and information. In contrast, due to limited feasibility space, resource-poor smallholders are
likely to choose autonomy and risk aversion, reducing external input and service use and using informal
service arrangements.
Farmer aspirations determine the livelihood strategy choices made within this feasibility space.
The less sophisticated informal service arrangements better fit with the livelihood strategies of
resource-poor smallholders, for whom dairy likely serves food security, savings, and consumption
assets objectives rather than income generation [21]. A growing feasibility space will not necessarily
be used to produce more milk (or other produce) for the market, let alone to make the significant
changes to farming practices that are required for intensive dairy farming [6]. The effect of farmer
aspirations is also apparent in the presence of ‘positive deviants’, those who actually utilize their
feasibility space for dairy development. They are recognized by peers as ‘serious farmers’ (Kenya) with
‘good management’ (Ethiopia). These households achieve higher productivity and income levels with
intensive dairy farming, utilizing more inputs and services, and marketing through formal channels.
They adopt suitable upgrading options, such as investments in zero-grazing units, planted forage,
feed rationing, mechanization of milking and forage production, and stronger contracting with milk
buyers, which may also involve quality control of milk, inputs, and services [21].
4.4. Sustainability of Intensification Pathways
We now address the question of whether the identified transition pathways do actually
contribute to the sustainability challenges mentioned in the introduction.
Alleviation of rural poverty—Social inclusion of smallholders in agricultural markets is a policy
priority in both countries. It is enacted through infrastructure development, support to cooperatives,
and public facilitation of pre-production inputs and services. To contribute to poverty alleviation,
these services need to reach the rural poor, i.e., smallholder dairy farmers, and need to support
upgrading of dairy farming. While not intending to evaluate public dairy interventions, this case study
yielded the following insights:
(i) Market access for resource-poor farmers can be positively impacted by policy support instruments
and development interventions; these have their own dynamics, which often appear to be at odds
with the space for private service provision. Long-term impact assessment is critical, as their
effects are often slow and not very noticeable [56].
(ii) Cooperatives offer no panacea for upgrading. In less sophisticated markets, cooperatives with a
basic service offer can stimulate market orientation. In intermediate market conditions, they serve
as collection and aggregation centers that are highly valued. In more sophisticated markets,
however, in order to stay competitive they have to move beyond being what Royer, et al. [57] call
a ‘claim group’ and develop into more efficient service providers.
187
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
(iii) As membership of cooperatives consists of resource-endowed smallholders with a relatively
large feasibility space, supporting them through the cooperatives has a large potential to grow
agricultural output [58] but excludes resource-poor smallholders.
(iv) The quality of public services generally is insufficient for dairy farming upgrading, which requires
dependable pre-production inputs and services [6]. While in Ethiopia authorities unintentionally
hamper dairy farming upgrading by monopolizing key support services, authorities in Kenya at
times hinder private service delivery development by subsidizing inputs and services to farmers
who have sufficient purchasing power.
The question thus remains: How can authorities effectively support market inclusion of the
resource-poor, offering them options to step up or step out, rather than hang in [21]? This study illustrates
the urgency of this issue by the observation that in areas such as LdHc Nandi South, the size of many
farms is close to or already below the 0.4 ha that farmers consider the threshold for a viable livelihood,
according to Waithaka et al. [55].
Supply of sufficient and safe food—In terms of quantity and product range, the Kenyan dairy
sector is meeting demand [51]. Focus on quantity rather than quality leads, however, to increased
concern about safety of milk and dairy products. These need to be addressed through upgrading of
quality assurance practices in all three domains. In Ethiopia, the sector cannot meet demand in terms of
either quantity or quality, as is evidenced by high prices and growing imports [17,50].
Upgrading should lead to higher marketed milk volumes, higher farmer incomes, and
marketing of safe food. This confirms findings of Duncan et al. [28] and Murage et al. [59]. ‘Jumps’ in
production are achieved by specialization, which requires investments of different kinds, including
management focus. Specific upgrading options are relevant within specific cluster conditions.
For example, the hub concept described by Kilelu et al. [11] may work best under smallholder
conditions with competitive demand for services and competition for milk; moreover, context
conditions for hub success include policy priority for smallholder dairy development, ample space for
private service provision, and presence of a third-party innovation intermediary [56].
Making farming climate-smart—Regarding environmental impact, interviewees in both
countries showed concern for the imbalanced use of fertilizer, leading to acidification and leaching of
soils, and for the injudicious use of agro-chemicals that can affect human health, water quality,
and product quality. The results suggest that farmers do worry about increasingly erratic
weather—indicating the need for climate adaptation—but did not connect climate change with their
own practices. These results show that before dairy sector actors will take action, climate change
mitigation does require carefully designed policy regulations that address both farmer and public
interests, as was also illustrated by Paul et al. [60].
We conclude that, in both countries, progress is centered around poverty alleviation objectives,
which aligns well with current policy interests. Sustainable upgrading pathways require more attention
for food safety and climate-smart criteria.
4.5. Upgrading Dynamics as Result of Farm–Market–Context Interactions
This study builds on three approaches for analysis of a farming system and its interaction with the
market: the farmers’ perspective of Oosting et al. [3], the market quality perspective of Duncan et al. [28]
and the sales arrangement/Windmill perspective of Leonardo et al. [34]. Our exploration of the
co-evolution of farming systems and service arrangements offers new insights in three areas.
Firstly, this study sheds light on the reasons particular types of farmers participate in particular
chains: upgrading of service arrangements within a dairy cluster offers technical upgrading
opportunities and enlarges farmers’ feasibility space, but each individual farmer needs to master
the resources required and aspire to upgrade. As farm resource endowments differ, a gradual and
incomplete shift of farmers to upgraded chain and farming practices is apparent. This study shows that
not only urban farmers but also rural farmers participate in multiple chains as a risk-reduction strategy
where service arrangements are insufficiently dependable. The traders’ arrangement connects rural
188
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
farmers in all clusters to both rural and urban consumers, while in the more dairy-oriented clusters,
farmers sell to both traders and processors. This suggests that farmers can be part of both chains
for a large part of the transformation trajectory from ‘semi-subsistence with small surplus to local
markets’ to ‘commercial supply to wholesale chains’. The transition described by Oosting et al. [3] of
‘rural farmers supplying to rural consumers’ to ‘rural farmers supplying to urban consumers’ can
apparently last for decades when market and context conditions are sub-optimal.
Secondly, this study sheds light on dynamics of co-evolution between farming system and service
arrangements. It adds five insights to the findings by Duncan et al. [28]: (1) technical upgrading of
housing and health care practices accompanies upgrading of breeding and feeding; (2) relations with
off-farm activities appear to be complex: while income from off-farm business and employment is
important to finance dairy investments and to supplement farm income, the proportion of households
engaging in off-farm activities in this study did not change with market quality; further research
is warranted into the patterns of such investment and its impact on dairy upgrading; (3) it shows
the competition between farming activities in the specialization process: in clusters where dairy
support services remain less conducive, farmers specialize into cash crops and short maturity
livestock production activities at the expense of dairy; (4) it shows the propelling role of competition
between service providers in the co-evolution between farming system and service arrangements;
(5) it shows the correlation between farming system upgrading and the activity of innovation
intermediaries; various authors [11,26] have shown the important roles of innovation intermediaries
in upgrading. While this study identified activities and impact of intermediaries in the various
service arrangements—dairy cooperatives, processing companies, public–private collaboration and
development agencies—further description goes beyond the scope of this paper.
Lastly, this study sheds light on system behaviors such as system jumps and adaptive cycles [3,27].
We postulate that co-dependencies between farm, market, and context are key to understanding the
adaptive cycle dynamics of system upgrading, including system jumps, stagnation, and collapse.
Section 4.6 further elaborates on these system dynamics.
4.6. Positive and Negative Co-Dependencies in Relation to System Jumps
The marked differences in upgrading status between clusters can be attributed to co-dependencies
between technical, value chain, and institutional upgrading processes. Co-dependencies make
upgrading in one domain dependent on that in another. An example of strong co-dependency is when
farmers can only adopt a new forage crop with commensurate investments in skills, (imported) seed,
and equipment, if service providers simultaneously invest in providing the inputs and services
necessary to grow the crop and if policy makers ensure adequate advisory services, as well as
regulations for importation and control of seed and equipment. We coin the concept of ‘concurrency’ to
describe this mutual dependency in terms of timing of synergistic upgrading in different domains.
Upgrading in all three domains can be expected to occur when ‘all lights are green’, i.e., drivers in
all three domains work as accelerators. Positive feedback loops [27] propel upgrading, potentially leading
to significant transitions. For example, farmers who consistently supply to formal milk buyers can use
their supply records to more easily get credit from financial institutions. This enables investments in
higher production capacity, which further improves access to services. This bankability cycle may be
initiated by infusion of capital from other income sources, such as employment and/or business, and
is more apparent in Kenya than in Ethiopia, where banks rarely provide (scarce) credit to dairy farms
due to dairy’s low rate of capital turnover.
Concurrency and positive feedback loops will not occur, however, when one or more drivers
‘throw a spanner in the works’, consecutively inhibiting upgrading in the three domains. In such cases,
co-dependencies cause negative feedback loops [27] that lead to stagnation and may be hard to break.
For example, the uncertainty about price and payment conditions pushes farmers to lower external
input levels, leading to lower production levels and higher seasonality of production. These in turn
inhibit processors from offering good payment conditions. Where other livelihood opportunities
189
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
have a significant competitive advantage, farmers can be expected to turn to those. In their absence,
decreasing farm size will lead to stagnation and declining wealth. Where dairy is hard to combine
with new livelihood activities, as in the case of tea, dairy may collapse and the farming system will
transform to a system without dairy; total disappearance of dairy in the LdHc cluster has so far been
prevented by the strong ‘cattle identity’ of the Nandi farmers.
Progressive upgrading may lead to transformation of the farming system and/or market system.
Farmers in all clusters noticed the final stages of the transformation from grazing land to farmland for
crops. The LdLc cluster only recently completed this transformation ‘from grazing to grain’, following
public promotion of improved grain variety packages in the 2010s. In the meantime, the most upgraded
HdHc cluster appears to be facing another transformation that will manifest in upgraded feeding
strategies: ‘from grazing with crop residues to zero-grazing with planted forage’. However, this is
co-dependent on further value chain upgrading that will ensure supply certainty and improved
access to and quality of inputs and services.
When a sizable number of upgrades needs to occur concurrently, a system jump can be expected
when reaching a certain threshold—or tipping point—of pressure to transform between alternative
system states [61]. This study illustrates this for two scale levels: (1) semi-subsistence clusters
transforming to more commercial intensive systems (dairy or horticulture) mentioned above; and
(2) households shifting their milk supply from traders to wholesale chains. At both levels the jump
requires concurrent synergistic upgrading and build-up of resources. In HdHc clusters in Kenya,
a number of positive dynamics occur that may lead to such a system jump, once the current lock-in of
farming and market systems can be overcome. That system lock-in is evident in chain fragmentation,
high costs of production and transactions, and disregard for quality assurance of milk and inputs.
We speculate that the pressure to upgrade gradually builds up and forces a number of concurrent
technical, value chain, and institutional upgrades to suddenly take place. Time will tell whether lock-in
will be overcome by a system jump through upgrading, or whether it will persist by protection of
vested interests, perpetuating the current situation until a crisis causes system collapse.
5. Conclusions
This comparative case study of five emerging dairy clusters in the East African highlands aimed to
explore how interaction of the farming system with market and context shape cluster emergence
and transformation from semi-subsistent to market-oriented dairy farming. Key findings of this
study add to debates about upgrading in clusters, value chains and farming systems; inclusion of
smallholders in markets; system jumps; and sustainable intensification pathways. They include:
• Co-dependencies between technical, value chain, and institutional upgrading processes are
key to understanding the adaptive cycle dynamics of farming- and market-system upgrading,
including system jumps, stagnation, and collapse. We coin the concept of ‘concurrency’ to describe
co-dependency in terms of timing of synergistic upgrading in different domains. When a sizable
number of upgrades needs to occur concurrently, a system jump can be expected upon reaching a
certain threshold of pressure to transform. The implications for studies of technical upgrading in
farming systems are that synergies between internal (farming system) and external (market and
context) factors determine upgrading outcomes.
• The upgrading status of dairy clusters results from diverging pathways along two
dimensions: feeding system intensification and cash crop intensification. Intensive dairy is
competing with other high-value cash crop options—intensive livestock activities, horticulture,
and perennials—that farmers specialize in depending on market and context conditions. Clusters
can be expected to move further along the intensification pathway started, unless actors
consciously influence direction through investments in upgrading conditions. The implications
for the debate on cluster upgrading are that (1) transition emerges from synergistic technical, value
chain, and institutional upgrading; and (2) evaluation of upgrading options needs to consider
notions of path dependency, concurrency, and investments in upgrading conditions.
190
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
• Farmers’ feasibility space for participation in transition expands along with their resource
base, access to production factors, presence of service arrangements, and conduciveness of
context factors. Resource endowment levels help explain why particular farmers participate
in particular chains. Transition from ‘semi-subsistent farmers supplying to local markets’ to
‘market-oriented farmers supplying to urban markets’ may take decades when market and
context conditions are sub-optimal. This adds to earlier work on inclusiveness of connecting
resource-poor farmers to markets.
• The most upgraded HdHc cluster appears to be facing another transformation that will manifest
in upgraded feeding strategies and further value chain upgrading, which will ensure supply
certainty and improved access to and quality of inputs and services. Studies of such real-life
system transformation cases will add to understanding of system jumps.
Further research may focus on quantification of the degree and thresholds of specialization and
intensification of (dairy) farming in clusters and on the impact of different service arrangements and
vertical coordination mechanisms on local economic development.
In both countries dairy development objectives are centered around poverty alleviation,
which aligns well with current policy interests. We recommend that policy makers and cluster
development planners carefully design sustainable intensification pathways for competitive
commodities. Sustainability issues to be considered include: (1) enabling a larger proportion of
resource-poor farmers to participate in markets; (2) at the same time, enabling private input and
service provision models that can last; and (3) more attention for food safety and climate smartness of
agricultural development.
Limitations to this study—The two x three villages sampling scheme used appears to sufficiently
capture variation within clusters to assess upgrading dynamics and transitions. While the small
number of one x three study villages in East Shoa cluster may insufficiently capture variation in the
zone, the study area can be considered representative for the peri-urban half of the zone. The three x
three scheme used in Nyandarua did not yield significantly more insight than the two x three scheme
used elsewhere.
The sub-regional administrative units taken as starting points for cluster boundaries allow a
researchable unit in which farm, market and context can show sufficient homogeneity and variation.
However, clusters do not necessarily coincide with such units. Nandi County in Kenya shows such
distinct differences that we can speak of two clusters, each appearing to be part of multi-county clusters
with Eldoret and Kisumu as centers. Further research will benefit from clearer delineation of clusters.
This will also improve sampling of study sites.
The retrospective interview tools, which explored timelines and past changes in farming practices,
did provide considerable insight in developments since the 1980s. Nevertheless, overcoming the bias
inherent in a snapshot approach when looking at time-based processes may only be possible through
longitudinal or historic research.
While this study analyzed interaction between two systems—farming and market—the farming
system was analyzed in more detail. Additional analysis of the market system may add valuable
insights, as suggested by Reardon [62], although it risks making the analysis too complex. Using a
food systems approach may be useful.
Additional studies may explore the impact of different service arrangements and vertical
coordination mechanisms on local economic development. Out-of-cluster service providers such as
processors and input suppliers may play a key role in upgrading dynamics, but may also capture a
significant part of the benefits of transition.
Supplementary Materials: The following is available online at http://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/10/11/
4324/s1, S1: Basic Data on Study Areas; S2: Cluster-Wise Description of Upgrading Dynamics; S3: Context
Conduciveness—The Impact of Dairy Policy.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization and Methodology, J.v.d.L., L.K., S.O., B.O.B., A.M.; Data Collection,
Data Curation, Formal Analysis,Writing–Original Draft Preparation, and Visualization, J.v.d.L.; Writing–Review
and Editing, L.K., S.O., B.O.B., A.M.; Supervision, L.K., S.O.; Funding Acquisition and Project Administration,
J.v.d.L., L.K.
191
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
Funding: This research was funded by NWO–WOTRO (projectW08.260.301).
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Feki Misbah, Alemayehu Asrat, Felix Opinya, Linnet
Mwangi and Ida Rademaker for help in data collection and transcription; Hans Schiere, Jos Bijman, Jan Helder
and Jim Groot for stimulating discussions and input.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Kilelu, C.; Klerkx, L.; Omore, A.; Baltenweck, I.; Leeuwis, C.; Githinji, J. Value chain upgrading and the
inclusion of smallholders in markets: Reflections on contributions of multi-stakeholder processes in dairy
development in Tanzania. Eur. J. Dev. Res. 2017, 29, 1102–1121. [CrossRef]
2. Giuliani, E.; Pietrobelli, C.; Rabellotti, R. Upgrading in global value chains: Lessons from Latin American
clusters. World Dev. 2005, 33, 549–573. [CrossRef]
3. Oosting, S.J.; Udo, H.M.J.; Viets, T.C. Development of livestock production in the tropics: Farm and farmers’
perspectives. Animal 2014, 8, 1238–1248. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Herrero, M.; Thornton, P.K.; Bernués, A.; Baltenweck, I.; Vervoort, J.; van de Steeg, J.; Makokha, S.;
van Wijk, M.T.; Karanja, S.; Rufino, M.C. Exploring future changes in smallholder farming systems by
linking socio-economic scenarios with regional and household models. Glob. Environ. Chang. 2014, 24,
165–182. [CrossRef]
5. Mockshell, J.; Kamanda, J. Beyond the agroecological and sustainable agricultural intensification debate:
Is blended sustainability the way forward? Int. J. Agric. Sustain. 2018, 16, 127–149. [CrossRef]
6. Udo, H.M.J.; Aklilu, H.A.; Phong, L.T.; Bosma, R.H.; Budisatria, I.G.S.; Patil, B.R.; Samdup, T.; Bebe, B.O.
Impact of intensification of different types of livestock production in smallholder crop-livestock systems.
Livest. Sci. 2011, 139, 22–29. [CrossRef]
7. Burke, W.J.; Myers, R.J.; Jayne, T.S. A triple-hurdle model of production and market participation in Kenya’s
dairy market. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 2015, 97, 1227–1246. [CrossRef]
8. Novo, A.M.; Slingerland, M.; Jansen, K.; Kanellopoulos, A.; Giller, K.E. Feasibility and competitiveness of
intensive smallholder dairy farming in Brazil in comparison with soya and sugarcane: Case study of the
Balde Cheio programme. Agric. Syst. 2013, 121, 63–72. [CrossRef]
9. Olwande, J.; Smale, M.; Mathenge, M.K.; Place, F.; Mithöfer, D. Agricultural marketing by smallholders in
Kenya: A comparison of maize, kale and dairy. Food Policy 2015, 52, 22–32. [CrossRef]
10. Didanna, H.L.; Wossen, A.M.; Worako, T.K.; Shano, B.K. Factors influencing intensification of dairy
production systems in Ethiopia. Outlook Agric. 2018, 47, 0030727018770463. [CrossRef]
11. Kilelu, C.W.; Klerkx, L.; Leeuwis, C. Supporting smallholder commercialisation by enhancing integrated
coordination in agrifood value chains: Experiences with dairy hubs in Kenya. Exp. Agric. 2016, 53, 269–287.
[CrossRef]
12. Dirven, M. Dairy clusters in Latin America in the context of globalization. Int. Food Agribus. Manag. Rev.
2001, 2, 301–313. [CrossRef]
13. Brasier, K.J.; Goetz, S.; Smith, L.A.; Ames, M.; Green, J.; Kelsey, T.; Rangarajan, A.; Whitmer,W. Small farm
clusters and pathways to rural community sustainability. Community Dev. 2007, 38, 8–22. [CrossRef]
14. Morosini, P. Industrial clusters, knowledge integration and performance. World Dev. 2004, 32, 305–326.
[CrossRef]
15. van Dijk, M.P.; Sverrisson, Á. Enterprise clusters in developing countries: Mechanisms of transition and
stagnation. Entrep. Reg. Dev. 2003, 15, 183–206. [CrossRef]
16. Kebebe, E.G.; Duncan, A.J.; Klerkx, L.; de Boer, I.J.M.; Oosting, S.J. Understanding socio-economic and policy
constraints to dairy development in Ethiopia: A coupled functional-structural innovation systems analysis.
Agric. Syst. 2015, 141, 69–78. [CrossRef]
17. Ruben, R.; Dekeba Bekele, A.; Megersa Lenjiso, B. Quality upgrading in Ethiopian dairy value chains:
Dovetailing upstream and downstream perspectives. Rev. Soc. Econ. 2017, 75, 296–317. [CrossRef]
18. Omiti, J.; Otieno, D.; Nyanamba, T.; McCullough, E. Factors influencing the intensity of market participation
by smallholder farmers: A case study of rural and peri-urban areas of Kenya. Afr. J. Agric. Resour. Econ. 2009,
3, 57–82.
192
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
19. Duru, M.; Therond, O. Livestock system sustainability and resilience in intensive production zones: Which
form of ecological modernization? Reg. Environ. Chang. 2015, 15, 1651–1665. [CrossRef]
20. Vroegindewey, R.; Hodbod, J. Resilience of agricultural value chains in developing country contexts:
A framework and assessment approach. Sustainability 2018, 10, 916. [CrossRef]
21. Dorward, A.; Anderson, S.; Bernal, Y.N.; Vera, E.S.; Rushton, J.; Pattison, J.; Paz, R. Hanging in, stepping up
and stepping out: Livelihood aspirations and strategies of the poor. Dev. Pract. 2009, 19, 240–247. [CrossRef]
22. Poulton, C.; Dorward, A.; Kydd, J. The future of small farms: New directions for services, institutions, and
intermediation. World Dev. 2010, 38, 1413–1428. [CrossRef]
23. Medina, G.; Almeida, C.; Novaes, E.; Godar, J.; Pokorny, B. Development conditions for family farming:
Lessons from Brazil. World Dev. 2015, 74, 386–396. [CrossRef]
24. Martin, G.; Allain, S.; Bergez, J.-E.; Burger-Leenhardt, D.; Constantin, J.; Duru, M.; Hazard, L.; Lacombe, C.;
Magda, D.; Magne, M.-A. How to address the sustainability transition of farming systems? A conceptual
framework to organize research. Sustainability 2018, 10, 2083. [CrossRef]
25. Campbell, R. A framework for inclusive market systems development. In LEO Brief ; USAID:Washington,
DC, USA, 2014.
26. Ramirez, M.; Clarke, I.; Klerkx, L. Analysing intermediary organisations and their influence on upgrading in
emerging agricultural clusters. Environ. Plan. A 2017. [CrossRef]
27. Schiere, J.B.; Darnhofer, I.; Duru, M. Dynamics in farming systems: Of changes and choices. In Farming
Systems Research into the 21st Century: The New Dynamic; Darnhofer, I., Gibbon, D., Dedieu, B.E., Eds.; Springer:
Berlin, Germany, 2012; pp. 337–363.
28. Duncan, A.; Teufel, N.; Mekonnen, K.; Singh, V.; Bitew, A.; Gebremedhin, B. Dairy intensification in
developing countries: Effects of market quality on farm-level feeding and breeding practices. Animal 2013, 7,
2054–2062. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Veldwisch, G.J.; Beekman,W.; Bolding, A. Smallholder irrigators, water rights and investments in agriculture:
Three cases from rural Mozambique. Water Altern. 2013, 6, 125–141.
30. Department for International Development (DFID). Sustainable Livelihoods Guidance Sheets; Department for
International Development: London, UK, 1999.
31. Darnhofer, I.; Gibbon, D.; Dedieu, B.E. Farming Systems Research into the 21st Century: The New Dynamic;
Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2012; p. 490.
32. Kebebe, E.G. Understanding Factors Affecting Technology Adoption in Smallholder Livestock Production
Systems in Ethiopia: The Role of Farm Resources and the Enabling Environment. Ph.D. Thesis, Wageningen
University,Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2015.
33. Bosman, H.; Moll, H.; Udo, H. Measuring and interpreting the benefits of goat keeping in tropical farm
systems. Agric. Syst. 1997, 53, 349–372. [CrossRef]
34. Leonardo,W.J.; Bijman, J.; Slingerland, M. The windmill approach: Combining transaction cost economics
and farming systems theory to analyse farmer participation in value chains. Outlook Agric. 2015, 44, 207–214.
[CrossRef]
35. Bijman, J.; Muradian, R.; Cechin, A. Agricultural cooperatives and value chain coordination. In Value Chains,
Social Inclusion and Economic Development: Contrasting Theories and Realities; Helmsing, A., Vellema, S., Eds.;
Routledge: Abingdon, UK, 2012; pp. 82–101.
36. Odhong, C.; Wahome, R.; Vaarst, M.; Kiggundu, M.; Nalubwama, S.M.; Halberg, N.; Githigia, S. Dairy cattle
management, health and welfare in smallholder farms: An organic farming perspective. J. Org. 2015, 2, 3–20.
37. Arias, P.; Halam, D.; Krivonos, E.; Morrison, J. Smallholder Integration in Changing Food Markets; FAO: Rome,
Italy, 2013.
38. Zeleke, T.; Awulachew, S.B. Policy Analysis of Water for Productive Use among Smallholder Irrigators in Ethiopia;
OXFAM America: Boston, MA, USA; Addis Abeba, Ethiopia, 2014.
39. Poole, N.D.; Chitundu, M.; Msoni, R. Commercialisation: A meta-approach for agricultural development
among smallholder farmers in Africa? Food Policy 2013, 41, 155–165. [CrossRef]
40. Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS). Nandi County Statistical Abstract; Republic of Kenya, Kenya
National Bureau of Statistics: Nairobi, Kenya, 2015.
41. Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS). Nyandarua County Statistical Abstract; Republic of Kenya, Kenya
National Bureau of Statistics: Nairobi, Kenya, 2015.
193
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4324
42. van der Lee, J.E.A. Influence of proximity to input and output markets on dairy farming in Ethiopia and
Kenya. in preparation.
43. Jayakaran, R. The Ten Seed Technique; World Version China: Beijing, China, 2002.
44. Francesconi, G.N. Cooperation for Competition: Linking Ethiopian Farmers to Markets;Wageningen Academic
Publishers: Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2009.
45. Amankwah, K.; Klerkx, L.; Oosting, S.J.; Sakyi-Dawson, O.; van der Zijpp, A.J.; Millar, D. Diagnosing
constraints to market participation of small ruminant producers in northern Ghana: An innovation systems
analysis. NJAS Wageningen J. Life Sci. 2012, 60–63, 37–47. [CrossRef]
46. Gebremedhin, B.; Jaleta, M. Commercialization of smallholders: Is market participation enough?
In Proceedings of the Joint 3rd African Association of Agricultural Economists (AAAE) and 48th Agricultural
Economists Association of South Africa (AEASA) Conference, Cape Town, South Africa, 19–23 September
2010.
47. Pearson, O.; Schmidt, M. Commodity individuation of milk in the Somali region, Ethiopia. Area 2017, 50,
213–221. [CrossRef]
48. Kijima, Y.; Yamano, T.; Baltenweck, I. Emerging markets in the post-liberalisation period: Evidence from the
raw milk market in rural Kenya. J. Afr. Econ. 2010, 19, 88–110. [CrossRef]
49. Recha, C.W. Local and Regional Variations in Conditions for Agriculture and Food Security in Kenya; AgriFoSe2030
Report 7; Lund University, Sweden Egerton University: Njoro, Kenya, 2018.
50. Makoni, N.; Mwai, R.; Redda, T.; van der Zijpp, A.J.; van der Lee, J. White Gold: Opportunities for Dairy Sector
Development Collaboration in East Africa; Centre for Development Innovation, Wageningen UR: Wageningen,
The Netherlands, 2014; p. 205.
51. KDB.Website Kenya Dairy Board. Available online: www.kdb.co.ke (accessed on 15 September 2018).
52. Bebe, B.O. Assessing potential for producing dairy replacements under increasing intensification of
smallholder dairy systems in the Kenya highlands. Livest. Res. Rural Dev. 2008, 20, 24.
53. Roessler, R.; Mpouam, S.E.; Muchemwa, T.; Schlecht, E. Emerging development pathways of urban livestock
production in rapidly growingWest Africa cities. Sustainability 2016, 8, 1199. [CrossRef]
54. Gonzalez-Mejia, A.; Styles, D.; Wilson, P.; Gibbons, J. Metrics and methods for characterizing dairy farm
intensification using farm survey data. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0195286. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Waithaka, M.M.; Thornton, P.K.; Herrero, M.; Shepherd, K.D. Bio-economic evaluation of farmers’
perceptions of viable farms in western Kenya. Agric. Syst. 2006, 90, 243–271. [CrossRef]
56. Reardon, T. The hidden middle: The quiet revolution in the midstream of agrifood value chains in developing
countries. Oxf. Rev. Econ. Policy 2015, 31, 45–63. [CrossRef]
57. Lie, H.; Rich, K.M.; van der Hoek, R.; Dizyee, K. An empirical evaluation of policy options for inclusive
dairy value chain development in Nicaragua: A system dynamics approach. Agric. Syst. 2018, 164, 193–222.
[CrossRef]
58. Royer, A.; Bijman, J.; Bitzer, V. Linking smallholder farmers to high quality food chains: Appraising
institutional arrangements. In Quality and Innovation in Food Chains: Lessons and Insights from Africa;
Wageningen Academic Publishers: Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2016; pp. 359–381.
59. Mellor, J.W. High rural population density Africa—What are the growth requirements and who participates?
Food Policy 2014, 48, 66–75. [CrossRef]
60. Murage, P.; Ngigi, M.; Bebe, B.; Ndambi, O. Technical efficiency of smallholder dairy farms across dairy
business models and associated determinants in the Kenya highlands. J. Rural Stud. 2018. submitted.
61. Paul, B.K.; Frelat, R.; Birnholz, C.; Ebong, C.; Gahigi, A.; Groot, J.C.J.; Herrero, M.; Kagabo, D.M.;
Notenbaert, A.; Vanlauwe, B.; et al. Agricultural intensification scenarios, household food availability
and greenhouse gas emissions in Rwanda: Ex-ante impacts and trade-offs. Agric. Syst. 2018, 163, 16–26.
[CrossRef]
62. Tittonell, P. Farm typologies and resilience: The diversity of livelihood strategies seen as alternative
system states. In Proceedings of the 5thWorld Congress on Conservation Agriculture, Brisbane, Australia,
26–29 September 2011.
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
194
sustainability
Article
Assessing Sustainable Food and Nutrition Security of
the EU Food System—An Integrated Approach
Monika Zurek 1,*, Aniek Hebinck 1,2, Adrian Leip 3, Joost Vervoort 1,4, Marijke Kuiper 5,
Maria Garrone 6, Petr Havlík 7, Thomas Heckelei 8, Sara Hornborg 9, John Ingram 1,
Anneleen Kuijsten 10, Lindsay Shutes 5, Johanna M. Geleijnse 10, Ida Terluin 5,
Pieter van ’t Veer 10, Jo Wijnands 5,†, Andrea Zimmermann 8,11 and Thom Achterbosch 5
1 Environmental change Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QY, UK; aniek.hebinck@su.se (A.H.);
j.m.vervoort@uu.nl (J.V.); john.ingram@eci.ox.ac.uk (J.I.)
2 Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm University, 10405 Stockholm, Sweden
3 European Commission, Joint Research Centre, I-21027 Ispra (VA), Italy; adrian.leip@ec.europa.eu
4 Copernicus Institute of Sustainable Development, University of Utrecht, 3584 CB Utrecht, The Netherlands
5 Wageningen Economic Research, 2595 BM The Hague, The Netherlands; marijke.kuiper@wur.nl (M.K.);
lindsayjshutes@gmail.com (L.S.); ida.terluin@wur.nl (I.T.); thom.achterbosch@wur.nl (T.A.)
6 LICOS—Centre for Institutions and Economic Performance, KU Leuven University, 3000 Leuven, Belgium;
maria.garrone@kuleuven.be
7 Ecosystems Services and Management Program, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis,
2361 Laxenburg, Austria; havlikpt@iiasa.ac.at
8 Institute for Food and Resource Economics, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany;
thomas.heckelei@ilr.uni-bonn.de (T.H.); andrea.zimmermann@fao.org (A.Z.)
9 Agrifood and Bioscience, RISE Research Institutes of Sweden, 40229 Gothenburg, Sweden;
sara.hornborg@ri.se
10 Division of Human Nutrition and Health, Wageningen University, 6700 AA Wageningen, The Netherlands;
anneleen.kuijsten@wur.nl (A.K.); marianne.geleijnse@wur.nl (J.M.G.); pieter.vantveer@wur.nl (P.v.V.)
11 Trade and Markets Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 00153 Rome, Italy
* Correspondence: monika.zurek@eci.ox.ac.uk; Tel.: +44-(0)1865-285531
† JoWijnands passed away.
Received: 29 September 2018; Accepted: 13 November 2018; Published: 19 November 2018 	

Abstract: Steering the EU food system towards a sustainability transformation requires a vast and
actionable knowledge base available to a range of public and private actors. Few have captured
this complexity by assessing food systems from a multi-dimensional and multi-level perspective,
which would include (1) nutrition and diet, environmental and economic outcomes together with
social equity dimensions and (2) system interactions across country, EU and global scales. This paper
addresses this gap in food systems research and science communication by providing an integrated
analytical approach and new ways to communicate this complexity outside science. Based on a
transdisciplinary science approach with continuous stakeholder input, the EU Horizon2020 project
‘Metrics, Models and Foresight for European SUStainable Food And Nutrition Security’ (SUSFANS)
developed a five-step process: Creating a participatory space; designing a conceptual framework of
the EU food system; developing food system performance metrics; designing a modelling toolbox
and developing a visualization tool. The Sustainable Food and Nutrition-Visualizer, designed to
communicate complex policy change-impacts and trade-off questions, enables an informed debate
about trade-offs associated with options for change among food system actors as well as in the policy
making arena. The discussion highlights points for further research related to indicator development,
reach of assessment models, participatory processes and obstacles in science communication.
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271; doi:10.3390/su10114271 195 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
Keywords: food systems; metrics; interdisciplinarity; sustainable food and nutrition security; food
system assessment; participatory approach; SUSFANS
1. Introduction
Food systems are complex entities, described as consisting of many different actors, their activities
and interactions, the driving forces shaping these activities and the outcomes produced at the
individual and system’s level. This complexity makes it difficult to analyze, govern or change food
systems. As such, food systems research asks for an integrated approach for analysis and new ways to
communicate this complexity outside the research domain [1,2]. Food systems currently do not deliver
the expected food and nutrition security outcomes, have many social inequalities embedded in them
and are regarded as a major driver of global environmental change [3–5]. The need to change our food
systems to be more sustainable (including in health, environmental, social and economic terms) is
widely acknowledged in research and policy circles [6–9]. Governance is considered an important lever
in changing these systems to becoming more sustainable and to reaching these goals [10–14], but food
systems encompass many different actors, each with their own set of driving forces and goals [15–17].
These need to be considered when discussing and negotiating change in the system. To govern
effectively, decision makers need both an understanding of food systems elements and the effect policy,
financial, or technical innovations (e.g., new technologies, measures to change consumer behavior)
might have on specific actors as well as overall food system outcomes. Only then a differentiated
debate across food system actors and policy makers and actors on what type of systems’ change is
needed and desirable will be enabled.
In this paper we present an integrated approach to food systems assessments applied to the
European Union. This approach was developed as a basis for the work of the Horizon2020 EU-funded
project ‘Metrics, Models and Foresight for European SUStainable Food And Nutrition Security’
(SUSFANS, www.susfans.eu). SUSFANS’ overall objective is to develop the conceptual understanding,
tools, foresight work and the evidence base to inform EU-wide and member state food and agriculture
policies towards a transformation of the food system with respect to its impacts on public health,
nutrition and diets, environmental, economic and social outcomes. Central to the project’s approach is
the assessment of the status of sustainable food and nutrition security (SFNS) in the EU and innovation
options for enhancing SFNS in the EU. SFNS can be defined as the capacity of a food system to deliver
food and nutrition security in an environmentally, economically and socially sustainable manner.
This concept combines nutrition and health with a social-ecological systems perspective. The project
aims to contribute to an integrated analysis of and effective decision making for food system change in
the EU and its member states [2].
This paper is the first in a series of papers that describe the project work with respect to assessing
food system status and transformation options. Here we lay out the conceptual foundations and steps
of the project’s approach. Subsequent papers will describe food system metrics work in more detail
and how the approach was operationalized for the EU and for the project’s four case study countries.
These papers will also describe the experiences and challenges with the approach. This paper is
structured as follows: After exploring what SFNS entails, we present a set of coherent steps that can
enable an integrated debate around food systems change. This includes the creation of a participatory
space; the development of a conceptual framework for mapping the EU food system (we recognize
that there is no ‘EU food system’ as such, but rather that it is a set of local, regional, national and global
interconnected systems and dynamics. We are using the term as a catch all term for the interlocked
systems and their actors that put food on people’s plates within the geographical unit that is the
EU); the development of a set of metrics to assess SFNS and innovation pathways for food system
change; the development of a modelling strategy based on the metrics; and the design of an integration
and visualization tool across the metrics particularly geared towards policy makers. The steps are
196
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
illustrated by the work done in the SUSFANS project (hereafter referred to as ‘the project’) to show
how the conceptual approach could be operationalized.
2. Defining Sustainable Food and Nutrition Security
Debates on how to define and achieve food security have shifted substantially over the last
decades. Various terms and terminologies have been used to capture the complexities of describing
the outcomes of a food system. These terms have come from different scientific disciplines, such as
the agricultural, development, or nutrition communities, and reflect the main discourses prevalent
at the time. Born out of the experiences of the famines after the SecondWorldWar, the definition of
food security focused on the supply of enough food and, thus, efforts to achieve it mainly emphasized
increasing agricultural production, specifically around staple foods [18–20]. The work of Amartya
Sen added the notion of entitlements to food, emphasizing accessibility, availability, affordability and
utilization of food [21,22]. The nutrition community complemented the discussion on food security by
emphasizing the need for an adequate nutritional status (in terms of under and over nutrition) in the
1990s [23,24], thus enlarging the concept by bringing in micro-level aspects of nutrition and health and
becoming more applicable for nutrition planning. With the realization of the environmental footprint
of our food system, the notion of ‘sustainable diets’ [13,25–31] describes the individual diet and its
associated environmental sustainability implications, calling for a better matching of food consumption
patterns with their environmental impacts. Since the 2000s, the question of how to change agriculture
has evolved into the notion of how to govern and change a complex system of interconnected food
actors (including farmers, food processors, retailers, consumers, and more). In short, aiming to put
enough calories on people’s plates as the key food security goal has morphed into several goals that
encompass nutritional adequacy, environmental issues as well as economic, livelihoods and equity
considerations. The SUSFANS project acknowledges this variety of goals for today’s food systems in
the notion of ‘sustainable food and nutrition security’.
The ‘food system’ concept is increasingly used today as a conceptual and analytical tool to
describe the processes and actors in the food sector. A food system is made up of food system activities
(growing, harvesting, processing, packaging, transporting, marketing, consuming, and disposing of
food and food-related items), and food system actors, all influenced by certain ‘drivers’ (processes
determining how these activities are performed). These activities by actors in the food system, result in a
number of outcomes, that, in turn, feed back to environmental and socio-economic drivers [15,17,32–34].
A food systems approach is “seen as the most effective strategy to enhance [food and] nutrition security in
a more sustainable manner” [24], for two main reasons. First, by focusing on impacts and leverage points
in the different domains it allows for an integrated assessment. Second, and building on the first, through
this integrated assessment it can provide a framework to structure the debate of a complex issue [15].
Central to the integrated food system approach presented in this paper is ‘Sustainable Food and
Nutrition Security’ (SFNS). This partly captures earlier work around food systems that embodies
divergent theoretical and ontological framings [35,36] and allows for the embedding of sustainability
dimensions into the evaluation of the food systems. This means that the approach also includes the
assessment of environmental, social and economic outcomes of the food system. One of the core
objectives of this integrated approach here is to support EU decision makers in fostering the EU food
policy goals described in various EU, member stated and food industry policies for the EU food
system. These are: (1) Deliver a balanced healthy diet to consumers, (2) reduce the systems’ negative
environmental impact, (3) build a viable, competitive and socially balanced agri-food sector, and
(4) contribute to social equity goals and global food security.
3. An Integrated Approach
Answering questions on how to achieve sustainable food and nutrition security, which is a
multi-faceted concept, requires answers that are built on the insights that various disciplines (e.g.,
nutritional, agricultural, economic, social sciences, etc.) can bring to the table and the development
197
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
of integrative tools that bring these together in accessible ways. In addition, the options for change
need to be grounded in the realities of the actors within the system as they need to be implementation
partners for new solutions.
A commonly used tool to communicate the status of a complex system—such as a food system—is
the use of indicators [23,24,37]. They are regarded as functional information tools that can indicate
the state of a certain policy goal, as they harness systems’ complexities by making data insightful to
people outside a certain research discipline [24,38]. Ranging from descriptive (pure data) to aggregated
(consisting of multiple indicators) indicators, they are used to explain “a given situation or underlying
reality which is difficult to quantify directly” [19]. The development of improved metrics and data for
the assessment of food systems is essential to better inform policymakers [39]. While there is a general
impression that indicators reflect reality and are ‘neutral’, assumptions embedded in underlying
conceptual frameworks remain hidden. Especially when indicators are developed by experts alone
the process can be opaque, not allowing for stakeholder-input [38,40]. Without transparency on the
construction of indicators, they have the potential to become a tool of control to the already powerful,
rather than empower all stakeholders.
The project developed several steps to deliver an integrated approach for assessing SFNS of the
EU food system and innovation options for food system transformation. These included:
1. The creation of a participatory space;
2. The development of a conceptual framework mapping out the driving forces, actors, outcomes
and goals for the EU food system [41];
3. An approach to devising a set of performance metrics for assessing the food system’s status with
respect to achieving SFNS and innovation options across four key policy goals formulated by
food system actors [42];
4. A modelling strategy for quantifying the sustainability status of FNS in the EU [43];
5. A visualization tool that allows food system actors to assess the outcomes and associated
trade-offs of possible innovation options in an integrated manner across the policy goals (the
SFNS visualizer) [44].
3.1. Step 1: The Creation of a Participatory Space
To achieve a food system assessment that can be an aid for decision making, it is essential to create
a participatory space [45,46], ideally involving the decision makers in the discussions. This includes
building on the knowledge, experiences and values of the many actors embedded in the system.
Creating a participatory space can be done in various ways but it is important that the stakeholders
come together from all over the food system and represent varying ‘environments’ and world views.
We invited a broad range of stakeholders in the EU food system into a so-called Stakeholder
Core Group that acted as an advisory group to the project, reviewing and refining research ideas,
the case study work and preliminary results. The selection was done based on an initial mapping of
the EU food system while preparing the project’s conceptual framework. The group consisted of the
three main types: Actors associated with food systems activities, food system policy makers, and food
system influencers (also see Figure 1 for details). The actual group consisted of 30 selected experts and
decision makers representing primary producers, the food industry, retail, consumer groups, investors,
regulators, policymakers and academics. The Stakeholder Core Group was brought together in four
annual, interactive workshops in which the team discussed and received input on ideas and on-going
work, particularly on the project’s conceptual framework, metrics selection, case studies on innovation
options and foresight work (Details on the project’s stakeholder engagement work can be found on
the project website, work package 6. www.susfans.eu). The input was then brought back into the
research design and shaped various research outputs (e.g., the stakeholders suggested to establish
equity considerations as one of the food system policy goals. This suggestion was then brought into
198
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
the conceptual framework design, metrics work and visualizer). As such, the involvement of the
Stakeholder Core Group was an intricate part of the project.
Figure 1. A visual representation of the conceptual framework that was developed based on an iterative
consultation process with the Stakeholder Core Group.
3.2. Step 2: A Conceptual Framework of the Food System
As the food system is a complex system and consists of various elements, a prerequisite for
a proper analysis and the assessment of its status is a conceptual framework that ensures that all
the important elements of the system are included. The framework provides a logical structure for
analysis together with a visual and written representation of the system, gives appropriate weight to its
components and shows important assumptions about the interactions within the system as well as gaps
in understanding. The most important purpose of the conceptual framework is to visualize the joint
understanding of the food system across academics as well as stakeholders to provide a common ground
for the interdisciplinary work of the project team as well as for the stakeholder work. The framework
helps to identify possible entry points for improving system’s performance and outcomes.
The conceptual framework (see Figure 1) was created with the input of all the scientific partners
and discussed in detail with the Stakeholder Core Group (Details on the project’s stakeholder
engagement work can be found on the project website, work package 6. www.susfans.eu). For that, the
project team provided the Core Group with a basic set up which was then populated, discussed and
revised jointly in interactive meetings. The stakeholder core group was later also consulted about the
chosen metrics (Step 3) whose selection depended on the conceptual framework. The basic components
of the conceptual framework (Figure 1) describing the EU food system are (a detailed description of
the conceptual framework can be found in project deliverable D1.1 on the website: www.susfans.eu):
199
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
• The diverse sets of actors that are connected to the EU food system;
• The direct and indirect factors driving the behavior of food system actors and therefore influencing
change within the food system (drivers of change);
• The outcomes that are related to the EU food system and its activities;
• The goals at the EU level that are shaping the drivers and the EU wide and national policies
affecting the food system;
• The interactions and feedback loops that take place among the aforementioned food
system components.
Ultimately, the framework allows for the identification of a wide set of policy and technical
recommendations which can be assessed not just against a number of specific objectives or for specific
actors, but which can also be examined against their effects when rippling through the whole system
and their resulting potential unintended consequences/trade-off effects. Furthermore, the framework
is intended to highlight the dynamic aspects of the system by laying out the system’s drivers as well as
the system’s interactions and various feedback mechanisms.
3.3. Step 3: Sustainability Metrics for Assessing the Food System and Innovation Options
A meaningful set of metrics to assess the performance of a food system as well as how the
system might transform with the introduction of possible innovations must give information with
respect to one or more system elements, ideally as presented in the conceptual framework. The project
decided in consultation with its Stakeholder Core Group to focus on the four policy goals as laid
out in the conceptual framework. The group wanted to understand how close the current system
is to achieving SFNS, defined in the four goals, and what possible innovations would do to help
achieve the goals. To that end, the project developed a Hierarchical Approach with four different
layers (Figure 2). The hierarchical approach intends to combine the idea that decision makers prefer a
small, yet comprehensive set of metrics that can communicate findings of an assessment, together with
the need to base these metrics on data from many sources that are easily accessible in a transparent
way. The hierarchy of the approach is depicted in Figure 2, using the following terminology:
• Individual variable: A measure that can be quantified and/or counted in commonly used
standards (e.g., hectares, kg).
• Derived variable: Combines a number of individual variables to devise a new measure (e.g., nitrogen
input vs. output, ratio of energy intake vs. expenditure,). Sometimes additional information is
required to derive the variable (e.g., conversion of individual Greenhouse Gas Emissions to total
CO2 equivalents).
• Aggregate indicator: Combines one or several derived variables and assesses them against a
particular goal (e.g., marine biological diversity, reduction of nitrogen surplus, food access).
• Performance metric: Combines a number of aggregated indicators and evaluates them against
performance of EU goals (e.g., climate stabilization, balanced diet for EU citizens).
The sets of performance metrics describing each policy goal are described in Table 1. A draft set
of individual and derived variables, substantiating the aggregate indicators and performance metrics,
as well as objectives for aggregate indicators is given in Reference [42].
200
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
Figure 2. Visualization of the layers that make up the hierarchical approach to devising performance
metrics in the Horizon2020 EU-funded project ‘Metrics, Models and Foresight for European SUStainable
Food And Nutrition Security’ (SUSFANS) project. ‘N’ indicates that the number of variables, indicators
and metrics can vary per policy goal.
Table 1. The policy goals used by the project to describe sustainable food and nutrition security
(SFNS) and their underlying performance metrics. For a full set of metrics, showing the full hierarchal
approach, see Reference [42].
Policy Goals Performance Metrics
1. Balanced and sufficient diets for EU citizens
Food based intake summary
Nutrient based intake summary
Energy balance
2. Reduced environmental impacts of the EU
food system
Climate stabilization
Clean air and water
Biodiversity conservation
Preservation of natural resources
3. Competitiveness of EU agri-food businesses
Relation between production and trade
Orientation and specialization of trade
Economic performance and productivity
4. Equitable outcomes and conditions of the
EU food system
Between producers and chain actors
Among consumers with regards to system conditions
Among consumers with regards to system outcomes
Footprint of food
3.4. Step 4: Modelling Strategy for Quantifying Performance Metrics for the Food System
Quantification and modelling of the metrics allows for a ground-truthing in available data and
establishing relationships across different metrics. However, current models have either a specific focus
on one section of a food system or do not cover all the different parts, such as seafood production [47].
Especially the latter is a major gap in food system assessments, as most modelling efforts up to date
focus on crop and livestock production, often excluding seafood. Using the integrated set of metrics to
assess SFNS in food systems in a forward-looking manner requires an integrated modelling strategy
that is currently missing. Thus, existing models with different characteristics and that can produce
different sets of outputs related to SFNS need to be connected in order to achieve a full picture of the
integrated set of metrics developed in consultation with the stakeholders.
In the project, this was done by building on already existing state-of-the art models such as
MAGNET [48], DIET [49], CAPRI [50,51] and GLOBIOM [52,53] and the development of a new tool to
define model diets that perform well on sustainability and health objectives (SHARP) [54]. However,
each of these have been developed to serve a specific sectoral policy—e.g., CAPRI has been developed
201
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
for the EU agricultural policy, and DIET was designed for the purpose of assessing the social welfare
impact of dietary change in the population at country level (see Figure 3). Taken separately, they
are not designed for integrated assessments such as we argue for in this paper. Using the models in
combination allows a consistent assessment across the different domains covered by each individual
model. In addition, the combined models better capture diets, include seafood production and aim
to portray synergies between sustainability and nutrition outcomes. For more detailed information
about the developed integrated modeling strategy see References [55,56]. Regardless, three important
deficiencies for food system assessment remain, namely actors behaving rationally by responding to
‘perfect information’ (see Section 4) are key for the models, food chain actors are not well represented
in all models, and not all metrics can so far be quantified.
Conscious of the deficiencies that are embedded in the different modelling tools and data
availability (more on this in Section 4), a modelling toolbox has been developed. This toolbox serves
mainly for forward looking exercises. It combines the economy-wide but aggregate assessments of
MAGNET with the European detail in CAPRI, and environmental assessments of GLOBIOM for
consistent projections of developments in the global food system. Results in terms of prices, income
and sustainability indicators are mapped to DIET for assessing consumer utility and to evaluate social
welfare impact, and to SHARP to assess at detailed product level the nutrition, health and sustainability
of diets. The toolbox also allows a reverse set-up, where an optimal diet derived by SHARP is imposed
in the other models to assess the food system changes it implies at aggregate level.
Figure 3. Existing models with different characteristics used to achieve a full picture of the integrated
set of food system assessment metrics. The figure indicates differences between the models in terms of
sectors (economy, diet, or production), differences in focus within these sectors and the scale level of
their assessment.
3.5. Step 5: Integration Across Metrics: The SUSFANS SFNS-Visualizer
The last step is to visualize change in the status of SFNS of the food system. Making trade-offs
visible and transparent is vital for decision making. A systemic perspective allows for evaluation
of how particular actions or decisions could affect people or dynamics in different ways, and what
trade-offs are key to making decisions on moving forward into more sustainable trajectories [57].
One of the key objectives of the SFNS visualizer is to communicate the systems complexities embedded
in the SUSFANS sustainability assessment framework to a non-technical audience. The tool informs
a discussion about the current sustainability performance of the EU food system, and pathways
202
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
for transforming the EU food system by means of public and private policy reform and innovation.
In doing so, it can highlight potential synergies between several goals in the EU food systems, while
avoiding trade-offs. As such, the decision maker can see the potential impact for the key goal they
are interested in, as well as for the other goals associated with sustainable food system change.
An interactive spider diagram called the ‘SFNS visualizer’ was developed (see Figure 4), aiming to:
• Show the status of the EU food system with respect to policy goals today;
• Allow the user to look across all policy goals at the same time;
• Allow the user to assess changes to the food system’s performance when introducing innovations;
• Visualize synergies and trade-offs across policy goals for the selected innovations to enable an
informed discussion about which innovations to pursue.
Figure 4 depicts a mock-up of the visualizer showing a hypothetical assessment of the current
status of the EU food system. The visualizer is constructed through the aggregation of variables
and indicators into performance metrics as described in the hierarchical approach in Step 3, see
Figure 5. The closer the red wedge in the middle gets to the performance metrics (i.e., the bigger
the wedge gets) the closer the food system gets towards achieving the formulated goals and their
targets. The hypothetical assessment shows, for example, that the project hypothesized that the EU is
doing relatively well with respect to a healthy diet and the food sector is quite competitive, while the
food system nevertheless produces high environmental impacts and could improve with respect to
equity considerations (the on-going modelling work is testing these hypotheses). If innovations are
introduced to the system (e.g., changes in fishery practices, more stringent nutrient management in
livestock systems or social innovations that help reduce food waste) these will result in changes in one
or more food system outcomes, i.e., red wedges. This will allow the user to see the effect of a particular
innovation option across all policy goals, thus visualizing synergies and trade-offs across policy goals.
􀀃
Figure 4. The SUSFANS SFNS-impact visualizer showing a hypothetical assessment of the current EU
food system’s SFNS status.
203
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
How the assessment shown in the visualizer is constructed through the aggregation of variables
and indicators, as described in Step 3, can be seen in Figure 5. Different stakeholders, countries, or
individuals will differ in their priorities with respect to the food system outcomes. For example, one
could prioritize social equity outcomes over environmental ones. While this is a static figure, the next
version of the SFNS visualizer will be able to show this change at a click of a button in an interactive
web platform. This will allow for the visualization of different world views, but also to ‘play’ with
the weights given to different performance metrics and see the effects this might have on achieving
certain objectives.
􀀃
Figure 5. The suggested design for the SFSNS-visualizer when in use. Unfolding the hierarchical
approach that underlies a performance metric, in an attempt to make the complexity and assumptions
that are embedded in the integrated approach visual to policy-makers or other non-metric experts.
4. Discussion
4.1. Food Systems as ‘Transformative Space Making’
The food systems lens is particularly useful in “making of a transformative space” [58]. As argued
elsewhere [45,46,58], transdisciplinary research is increasingly becoming a bridge between the worlds
of science and practice, while being highly problem-oriented. The use of an inherently transdisciplinary
perspective such as food systems, allows for the convening of people that would otherwise be less
likely to enter into discussions about the future of food. The use of the food systems lens, breaking
something as complex and dynamic as the food system down into activities, actors and drivers,
allows for improved collaboration between stakeholders. This contributes to a mediation of the many
different, and sometimes contesting, discourses actors hold about the trajectory of food systems [59].
Consequently, a food systems perspective leads to more effective discussions and an ability to come to
a shared understanding.
As this approach is centered on participatory processes, where stakeholders and academics share
their ideas about activities and drivers within the system, knowledge about and experience with the
diverse food systems components is likely to be varied. Moving through a participatory process to
204
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
map food systems also increases the awareness of complexity and dynamics that are associated with
the food system [60]. These characteristics lead us to the argument that the food systems lens is a
transformative space making tool.
4.2. Availability of Indicators and Metrics
Central to the approach is integration of different types of knowledge and ways of conceiving
the food system and its challenges. The move towards incorporation of social equity was the result of
an iterative process to co-construct the conceptual framework with the stakeholders. Consultation
with food sovereignty experts led to the realization that the availability of social equity or food
sovereignty metrics and indicators are less straight forward. While we have started a modest
attempt at formulating such metrics, it signals a deeper issue in food systems research. A disconnect
between research communities is splitting crucial themes of food systems research between a metrics
and modelling-centered side of research and more qualitative equity-centered side of research.
Consequently, this has resulted in a disconnect between the two streams, partly explaining the lack of
metrics-based food systems assessments that include social equity components [61]. There is an urgent
need for research to focus on the conceptualization of social equity assessment mechanisms, as of yet
there are only few examples that are moving in this direction [62,63].
There are some obstacles to the formulation of such metrics, such as cross-scale interactions,
contextual and situational differences. The global and cross-scale interactions that make up food
systems complicate social equity assessment. For example, it is difficult to establish whether the effect
of a policy change within EU boundaries is solely responsible for an improvement or deterioration
of social equity among food chain actors in a non-EU country. Nevertheless, interaction between the
metrics and modelling oriented, and the qualitative equity-centered, research communities is vital for
integrated assessment and sustainable development of food systems. Secondly, availability of data
remains a common challenge. Data for the EU, especially considering environmental, economic and
health data, is generally well documented and readily available via open access statistics. Although,
data for seafood is often more difficult to access and is generally treated separately from broader food
system issues [47]. For effective assessment of food systems, approaches will need to be available on a
global scale [64]. However, the availability of data is political, as it partly relies on strong governance
mechanisms to enforce stable monitoring systems and requires overall stable circumstances within a
country. Especially when the latter is lacking, as for example could be the case after natural disasters,
monitoring and data collection become less of a priority.
4.3. Learning from the SUSFANS Approach
Central to the integrated approach is participation of stakeholders, as the entire approach builds
on the development of a common framing around food systems. A crucial and difficult first step is
the ability to attract a broad group of stakeholders that can represent the different communities and
framings (industry, Non-governmental Organizations, consumers, farmers etc.) together with group of
academics covering various disciplines. Anyone aspiring to develop a similar integrated approach is
required to perform several tasks to create the needed participatory space. This includes the selection
of participants that are able to reflect or represent stakeholders for the participatory work; engagement
with different mechanisms to get these partners on board and; offering of space for consultation and
evaluation that also benefits these partners in some way (be it in gaining a network, or achieving the
actual objective of the approach). In other words, the development of a successful integrated approach
hinges on the ability to create such a participatory space.
With respect to building an integrated modelling framework the project encountered three
different issues with the current selection of models. First, prices (and incomes) driving rational
behavior of actors having perfect information (i.e., all and correct information) play a key role in
the partial (DIET, CAPRI, GLOBIOM) and general (MAGNET) equilibrium model responses [65].
Thus, prices and income weigh heavily in the quantification of changes in the metrics. Non-price
205
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
considerations (like taste, social norms, convenience, etc.) are partly captured by estimated responses
by producers and consumers to changes in prices. Using the elasticities in models, these are then
summarized to quantify reactions to potential price changes. In other words, there is a high focus on
prices because data on the responses of consumers and producers to non-price incentives are lacking.
As such, it is difficult to separate the impact of non-price incentives on consumption patterns and
production decision. Complementary analyses on how non-price incentives affect aggregate behavior
are needed to be able to assess their implications for the food system. Second, most models cover both
the primary producer as the consumer-end of the food system well, while the food chain actors are
not very well represented either because the partial equilibrium models (CAPRI, GLOBIOM) define
demand in terms of primary products [50,52], focus on the consumer (DIET, SHARP) or have a very
aggregated representation of the supply chain (MAGNET) [48,54]. This restricted depiction of the
value chain can affect the accuracy of the quantification of a number of performance metrics. This can
for example lead to overlooking a number of processes, and therewith miss the associated emissions in
the environmental impact calculations. Current data availability and state of research are reflected in
these models. It is challenging to address the large heterogeneity that exists across supply chains in
applied simulation models. Third, there are a small number of variables—and with that performance
metrics—where current models are not able to quantify all variables. This is particularly associated
to the goal of ‘equitable outcomes and conditions of the EU food system’, as this is still novel terrain
when it comes to metric development [61,62,66].
Integral to trans-disciplinary science is communication of its results to decision making and
policy-makers. This becomes especially important when scientific advice regarding complex
dynamic systems, such as a food system, is plural and conditional [67]. In the development of
the SFNS-visualizer we have attempted to present the complexity of the food system in a manner
that is palatable to a broad audience of decision makers. We were aware of these issues engrained
in traditional science-policy communication that are directed at communicating something that is
complex in a brief and ‘simple’ manner. As such, we attempted to design the SFNS-visualizer such that
it ‘opens up’ discussions around food systems, as it will be able to show various states of the system,
rather than a single state [68]. It aims to encourage a more informed dialogue rather than one-way,
singular science-policy communication.
5. Conclusions
The paper has presented an integrated approach to assessing food systems and possible
innovations based on a conceptual framework of the EU food system, divided into five steps. There are
a number of novelties to this approach: Firstly, this approach is based on a set of integrated performance
metrics that allow for assessment of such innovations from various angles, thereby revealing synergies
and trade-offs. Secondly, it puts forward a transdisciplinary, multidimensional model that emphasizes
usability for a wide range of food system actors. Lastly, it is the first approach that explicitly
includes social equity as part of food system assessments: All four components (nutrition and diet,
environmental and economic outcomes, and social equity) are essential for an integrated assessment of
food systems and development of more sustainable trajectories.
Presented in the paper is the ‘SFNS-visualizer’ which can show the status of the EU food system
with respect to reaching four key policy goals for food system outcomes, as formulated by stakeholders
and actors in the system. Brought together in this visualizer are the integrated metrics that are
developed based on the designed conceptual framework. These metrics are backed by a modelling
strategy that combines several models that span across the food system components. The latter gives
way to a ‘dynamic’ visualizer. The planned final visualizer will be an online tool that allows users to
make changes and see the impact of these changes. This contributes to an informed dialogue around
desired changes and the possible forms of action to be taken to achieve these.
Lastly, we have highlighted some limitations regarding the food systems assessment that require
further research. The first is the development of social equity metrics, due to lack of prior developed
206
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
metrics around the topic and an overall difficulty to obtain data on possible equity indicators.
We urgently suggest exploration of social equity metrics development and more broadly, given
the lack of data, metrics that can be gathered on a large scale. Secondly, we emphasize the difficulty,
but necessity, of communicating the plurality and conditionality of complex, dynamic systems research
to an audience of policy-makers. With this paper we have aimed to set a standard for food systems
research that provides a starting point for further refinement and development.
Author Contributions: Funding acquisition, T.A.; Investigation, M.Z., A.H., A.L., J.V., M.K., M.G., P.H., T.H., S.H.,
A.K., L.S., J.M.G., I.T., P.v.V., J.W. and A.Z.; Methodology, M.Z., A.L., M.K. and John Ingram; Project administration,
T.A.; Supervision, M.Z.; Visualization, A.H.; Writing–original draft, M.Z., A.H. and M.K.; Writing–review &
editing, M.Z., A.H., A.L., J.V., T.A., M.G., P.H., T.H., S.H., J.I., A.K., L.S., I.T., J.W. and A.Z.
Funding: The research leading to the ideas expressed in this paper has received funding from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 framework programme under grant no. 633692 (SUSFANS).
Acknowledgments: We are grateful to all members and advisers of the SUSFANS project, to the participants of
four successive workshops of the SUSFANS Stakeholder Core Group between October 2015 and June 2018, and
the FOOD 2030 congress (Hohenheim, October 2018) for useful comments and suggestions. The authors would
like to thank the anonymous reviewers and Luigi Piemontese for insightful feedback to the paper.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Chaudhary, A.; Gustafson, D.; Mathys, A. Multi-indicator sustainability assessment of global food systems.
Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 848. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Rutten, M.; Achterbosch, T.J.; de Boer, I.J.M.; Cuaresma, J.C.; Geleijnse, J.M.; Havlík, P.; Heckelei, T.; Ingram, J.;
Leip, A.; Marette, S.; et al. Metrics, models and foresight for European sustainable food and nutrition security:
The vision of the SUSFANS project. Agric. Syst. 2018, 163, 45–57. [CrossRef]
3. Foley, J.A.; Ramankutty, N.; Brauman, K.A.; Cassidy, E.S.; Gerber, J.S.; Johnston, M.; Mueller, N.D.;
O’Connell, C.; Ray, D.K.; West, P.C.; et al. Solutions for a cultivated planet. Nature 2011, 478, 337–342.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Garnett, T. Where are the best opportunities for reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the food system
(including the food chain)? Food Policy 2011, 36, S23–S32. [CrossRef]
5. McKeon, N. Global food governance in an era of crisis: Lessons from the United Nations Committee on
World Food Security. Can. Food Stud. 2015, 2, 328. [CrossRef]
6. Gordon, L.J.; Bignet, V.; Crona, B.; Henriksson, P.J.G.; van Holt, T.; Jonell, M.; Lindahl, T.; Troell, M.; Barthel, S.;
Deutsch, L.; et al. Rewiring food systems to enhance human health and biosphere stewardship. Environ. Res. Lett.
2017, 12, 100201. [CrossRef]
7. Brunori, G.; Bartolini, F.; Avermaete, T.; Brzezina, N.; Mathijs, E.; Marsden, T.; Faus, A.M.; Sonnino, R.;
Hebinck, P.; Oostindie, H.; et al. Creating Resilient Food Systems for Enhancing Food and Nutrition Security;
TRANSMANGO: EU KBBE.2013.2.5-01 Grant Agreement No. 613532; TRANSMANGO: Leuven, Belgium, 2017.
8. IPES Food. The New Science of Sustainable Food Systems: Overcoming Barriers to Food Systems Reform; IPES Food:
Brussels, Belgium, 2015. Available online: http://www.ipes-food.org/reports (accessed on 15 November 2018).
9. Milan Expo. Milan Urban Food Policy Pact; Milan Expo: Milan, Italy, 2015. Available online: http://www.
milanurbanfoodpolicypact.org/ (accessed on 15 November 2018).
10. Duncan, J. “Greening” global food governance. Can. Food Stud. 2015, 2, 335. [CrossRef]
11. Haysom, G. Food and the city: Urban scale food system governance. Urban Forum 2015, 26, 263–281.
[CrossRef]
12. Lang, T.; Barling, D. Food security and food sustainability: Reformulating the debate. Geogr. J. 2012, 178,
313–326. [CrossRef]
13. Lang, T.; Barling, D.; Caraher, M. Food Policy: Integrating Health, Environment and Society; Oxford University
Press: Oxford, UK, 2009; ISBN 0191015717.
14. Candel, J.J.L.; Pereira, L. Towards integrated food policy: Main challenges and steps ahead. Environ. Sci. Policy
2017, 73, 89–92. [CrossRef]
15. Ingram, J. A food systems approach to researching food security and its interactions with global
environmental change. Food Secur. 2011, 3, 417–431. [CrossRef]
207
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
16. Ericksen, P.J. Conceptualizing food systems for global environmental change research. Glob. Environ. Chang.
2008, 18, 234–245. [CrossRef]
17. Ericksen, P.J. What is the vulnerability of a food system to global environmental change? Ecol. Soc. 2008, 13,
14. [CrossRef]
18. CFS. Coming to Terms with Terminology—Food and Nutrition Security; Thirty-Ninth Session, Item V.a; Commitee
onWorld Food Security: Rome, Italy, 2012. Available online: http://www.fao.org/docrep/meeting/026/
MD776E.pdf (accessed on 15 November 2018).
19. Pangaribowo, E.H.; Gerber, N.; Torero, M. Food and Nutrition Security Indicators: A Review. Available
online: https://www.wecr.wur.nl/WECRGeneral/FoodSecurePublications/05_Pangaribowo%20Gerber%
20Torero_FNS%20Indicators.pdf (accessed on 15 November 2018).
20. Pinstrup-Andersen, P. Food security: Definition and measurement. Food Secur. 2009, 1, 5–7. [CrossRef]
21. Sen, A. Hunger and Entitlements;World Institute for Development Economics Research: Helsinki, Finland,
1987; ISBN 9519991506.
22. Sen, A. Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation; Clarendon Press: New York, NY, USA;
Oxford, UK, 1981; ISBN 0198284632.
23. Acharya, T.; Fanzo, J.; Gustafson, D.; Ingram, J.S.I.; Schneeman, B. Assessing Sustainable Nutrition Security:
The Role of Food Systems; The International Life Sciences Institute, Research Foundation, Center for Integrated
Modeling of Sustainable Agriculture and Nutrition: Washington, DC, USA, 2014.
24. Gustafson, D.; Gutman, A.; Leet, W.; Drewnowski, A.; Fanzo, J.; Ingram, J. Seven food system metrics of
sustainable nutrition security. Sustainability 2016, 8, 196. [CrossRef]
25. Allen, T.; Prosperi, P. Metrics of Sustainable Diets and Food Systems; Workshop Report; Bioversity International
& CIHEAM-IAMM: Montpellier, France, 2014.
26. Fischer, C.G.; Garnett, T. Plates, Pyramids and Planet; FAO; The Food Climate Research Network at The
University of Oxford: Oxford, UK, 2016; ISBN 9789251092224.
27. Lukas, M.; Rohn, H.; Lettenmeier, M.; Liedtke, C.; Wiesen, K. The nutritional footprint—Integrated
methodology using environmental and health indicators to indicate potential for absolute reduction of
natural resource use in the field of food and nutrition. J. Clean. Prod. 2016, 132, 161–170. [CrossRef]
28. Ranganathan, J.; Vennard, D.; Waite, R.; Dumas, P.; Lipinski, B.; Searchinger, T. Shifting Diets for a Sustainable
Food Future; Installment 11 of “Creating a Sustainable Food Future”; World Resources Institute: Washington,
DC, USA, 2016.
29. Lang, T.; Heasman, M. Food Wars: The Global Battle for Mouths, Minds and Markets; Earthscan: London, UK, 2004.
30. Jones, A.D.; Hoey, L.; Blesh, J.; Miller, L.; Green, A.; Shapiro, L.F. A Systematic Review of the Measurement
of Sustainable Diets. Adv. Nutr. Int. Rev. J. 2016, 7, 641–664. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. Gussow, J.D. Mediterranean diets: Are they environmentally responsible? Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1995, 61,
S1383–S1389. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Tendall, D.M.; Joerin, J.; Kopainsky, B.; Edwards, P.; Shreck, A.; Le, Q.B.; Kruetli, P.; Grant, M.; Six, J.
Food system resilience: Defining the concept. Glob. Food Secur. 2015, 6, 17–23. [CrossRef]
33. FAO. Climate Change and Food Security: A Framework Document; Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations: Rome, Italy, 2008.
34. Ingram, J.; Ericksen, P.; Liverman, D. Food Security and Global Environmental Change; Earthscan: London, UK;
Washington, DC, USA, 2010.
35. Foran, T.; Butler, J.R.A.; Williams, L.J.; Wanjura, W.J.; Hall, A.; Carter, L.; Carberry, P.S. Taking complexity in
food systems seriously: An interdisciplinary analysis. World Dev. 2014, 61, 85–101. [CrossRef]
36. Brinkley, C. Avenues into food planning: A review of scholarly food system research. Int. Plan. Stud. 2013,
18, 243–266. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Prosperi, P.; Allen, T.; Cogill, B.; Padilla, M.; Peri, I. Towards metrics of sustainable food systems: A review
of the resilience and vulnerability literature. Environ. Syst. Decis. 2016, 36, 3–19. [CrossRef]
38. Lehtonen, M.; Sébastien, L.; Bauler, T. The multiple roles of sustainability indicators in informational
governance: Between intended use and unanticipated influence. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 2016, 18, 1–9.
[CrossRef]
39. Global Panel. Improved Metrics and Data Are Needed for Effective Food System Policies in the Post-2015 Era;
Technical Brief; Global Panel on Agriculture and Food Systems for Nutrition: London, UK, 2015.
208
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
40. Lehtonen, M. Indicators: Tools for informing, monitoring or controlling? In The Tools of Policy Formulation:
Actors, Capacities, Venues and Effects; Jordan, A.J., Turnpenny, J.R., Eds.; Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd.:
Cheltenham, UK, 2015; pp. 76–99. ISBN 9781783477036.
41. Zurek, M.; Ingram, J.; Zimmermann, A.; Garrone, M.; Rutten, M.; Tetens, I.; Leip, A.; Veer, P.; Verain, M.;
Bouwman, E.; et al. D1.1 A Framework for Assessing and Devising Policy for Sustainable Food and Nutrition
Security in EU: The SUSFANS Conceptual Framework; SUSFANS, GA No. 633692; SUSFANS: The Hague,
The Netherlands, 2016.
42. Zurek, M.; Leip, A.; Kuijsten, A.; Wijnands, J.; Terluin, I.; Shutes, L.; Hebinck, A.; Zimmermann, A.; Götz, C.;
Hornborg, S.; et al. D1.3 Sustainability Metrics For The EU Food System: A Review Across Economic, Environmental
And Social Considerations; SUSFANS, GA No. 633692; SUSFANS: The Hague, The Netherlands, 2017.
43. Kuiper, M.; Zurek, M.; Havlik, P.; Deppermann, A.; Valin, H.; Kuijsten, A.; Geleijnse, M.; Veer, P.; Heckelei, T.;
Götz, C.; et al. A Modelling Strategy for Quantifying the Sustainability of Food and Nutrition Security in the EU:
Deliverable 1.4; SUSFANS, EU Grant Agreement 633692; SUSFANS: The Hague, The Netherlands, 2017.
44. Zurek, M.; Hebinck, A.; Leip, A.; Achterbosch, T.; Garrone, M.; Havlik, P.; Heckelei, T.; Ingram, J.; Soler, L.G.;
van’t Veer, P.; et al. D1.5 An Inegrated Set of Metrics for Assessing the Overall Sustainability of Food and Nutrition
Security in the EU; SUSFANS, GA No. 633692; SUSFANS: The Hague, The Netherlands, 2017.
45. Pereira, L.; Karpouzoglou, T.; Doshi, S.; Frantzeskaki, N. Organising a safe space for navigating
social-ecological transformations to sustainability. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2015, 12, 6027–6044.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Hebinck, A.; Vervoort, J.M.; Hebinck, P.; Rutting, L.; Galli, F. Imagining transformative futures: Participatory
foresight for food systems change. Ecol. Soc. 2018, 23, 16. [CrossRef]
47. Farmery, A.K.; Gardner, C.; Jennings, S.; Green, B.S.; Watson, R.A. Assessing the inclusion of seafood in the
sustainable diet literature. Fish Fish. 2017. [CrossRef]
48. Woltjer, G.; Kuiper, M.; Kavallar, A.; van Meijl, H.; Powell, J.; Rutten, M.; Shutes, L.; Tabeau, A. The MAGNET
Model: Module Description; LEI Report No. 14-057; LEI—Wageningen UR:Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2014.
49. Irz, X.; Leroy, P.; Réquillart, V.; Soler, L.G. Economic assessment of nutritional recommendations. J. Health Econ.
2015. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Britz, W.; Van Ittersum, M.; Lansink, A.O.; Heckelei, T. Tools for integrated assessment in agriculture. State
of the art and challenges. Bio-Based Appl. Econ. 2012, 1, 125–150. [CrossRef]
51. Leip, A.; Britz,W.; Weiss, F.; De Vries,W. Farm, land, and soil nitrogen budgets for agriculture in Europe
calculated with CAPRI. Environ. Pollut. 2011, 159, 3243–3253. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Havlik, P.; Valin, H.; Herrero, M.; Obersteiner, M.; Schmid, E.; Rufino, M.C.; Mosnier, A.; Thornton, P.K.;
Bottcher, H.; Conant, R.T.; et al. Climate change mitigation through livestock system transitions. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 2014, 111, 3709–3714. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Havlík, P.; Schneider, U.A.; Schmid, E.; Böttcher, H.; Fritz, S.; Skalský, R.; Aoki, K.; De Cara, S.;
Kindermann, G.; Kraxner, F.; et al. Global land-use implications of first and second generation biofuel
targets. Energy Policy 2011. [CrossRef]
54. Irz, X.; Leroy, P.; Réquillart, V.; Soler, L.-G. Beyond wishful thinking: Integrating consumer preferences in the
assessment of dietary recommendations. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0158453. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Rutten, M.; Zimmermann, A.; Havlík, P.; Leip, A.; Heckelei, T.; Achterbosch, T. D9.1 Modelling Sustainability
and Nutrition in Long Run Analyses of the EU Agri-Food system: Work plan for the SUSFANS Toolbox; SUSFANS,
GA No. 633692; SUSFANS: The Hague, The Netherlands, 2016.
56. Kuiper, M.; Oudendag, D.; Bartelings, H.; Shutes, L.; Verma, M.; Tabeau, A. D9.2 Enhanced Modelling of
Sustainable Food and Nutrition Security: Food Consumption and Nutrition Behaviour of European Households;
SUSFANS, GA No. 633692; SUSFANS: The Hague, The Netherlands, 2017.
57. Galafassi, D.; Daw, T.M.; Munyi, L.; Brown, K.; Barnaud, C.; Fazey, I. Learning about social-ecological
trade-offs. Ecol. Soc. 2017, 22, 1–27. [CrossRef]
58. Marshall, F.; Dolley, J.; Priya, R. Transdisciplinary research as transformative space making for sustainability:
Enhancing propoor transformative agency in periurban contexts. Ecol. Soc. 2018, 23, 1–13. [CrossRef]
59. Clapp, J. Food security and food sovereignty: Getting past the binary. Dialogues Hum. Geogr. 2014, 4, 206–211.
[CrossRef]
60. Galafassi, D.; Daw, T.M.; Thyresson, M.; Rosendo, S.; Chaigneau, T.; Bandeira, S.; Munyi, L.; Gabrielsson, I.;
Brown, K. Stories in social-ecological knowledge cocreation. Ecol. Soc. 2018, 23. [CrossRef]
209
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4271
61. Weiler, A.M.; Hergesheimer, C.; Brisbois, B.; Wittman, H.; Yassi, A.; Spiegel, J.M. Food sovereignty, food
security and health equity: A meta-narrative mapping exercise. Health Policy Plan. 2015, 30, 1078–1092.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Landert, J.; Schader, C.; Moschitz, H.; Stolze, M. A holistic sustainability assessment method for urban food
system governance. Sustainability 2017, 9, 490. [CrossRef]
63. Dixon, J.; Omwega, A.M.; Friel, S.; Burns, C.; Donati, K.; Carlisle, R. The health equity dimensions of urban
food systems. J. Urban Health 2007, 84. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Open Data Institute. How CanWe Improve Agriculture, Food and Nutrition with Open Data? 2015. Available
online: https://www.godan.info/documents/how-can-we-improve-agriculture-food-and-nutrition-open-data
(accessed on 15 November 2018).
65. Valin, H.; Sands, R.D.; van der Mensbrugghe, D.; Nelson, G.C.; Ahammad, H.; Blanc, E.; Bodirsky, B.;
Fujimori, S.; Hasegawa, T.; Havlik, P.; et al. The future of food demand: Understanding differences in global
economic models. Agric. Econ. 2014. [CrossRef]
66. James, S.W.; Friel, S. An integrated approach to identifying and characterising resilient urban food systems
to promote population health in a changing climate. Public Health Nutr. 2015, 18, 2498–2508. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
67. Stirling, A. Keep it complex. Nature 2010, 468, 1029–1031. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. Leach, M.; Scoones, I.; Stirling, A. Dynamic Sustainabilities: Technology, Environment, Social Justice; Earthscan:
London, UK, 2010; ISBN 1849775060.
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
210
sustainability
Article
A Reflection of the Use of the Life Cycle Assessment
Tool for Agri-Food Sustainability
Oriana Gava *, Fabio Bartolini, Francesca Venturi, Gianluca Brunori, Angela Zinnai and
Alberto Pardossi
Department of Agriculture, Food and Environment, University of Pisa, 56124 Pisa, Italy;
fabio.bartolini@unipi.it (F.B.); francesca.venturi@unipi.it (F.V.); gianluca.brunori@unipi.it (G.B.);
angela.zinnai@unipi.it (A.Z.); alberto.pardossi@unipi.it (A.P.)
* Correspondence: oriana.gava@for.unipi.it
Received: 11 October 2018; Accepted: 20 December 2018; Published: 23 December 2018
	

Abstract: In pursuit of agricultural sustainability and food security, research should contribute
to policy-making by providing scientifically robust evidence. Life cycle assessment (LCA) is an
excellent candidate for generating that evidence, thereby helping the selection of interventions
towards more sustainable agri-food. The purpose of this article is proposing a basis for discussion
on the use of the LCA tool for targeting and monitoring of environmental policy interventions
in agri-food. The problem of reducing the environmental burden in agri-food can be tackled
by acting on the supply and/or demand sides and may benefit from the collaboration of supply
chain stakeholders. Agri-food policies that most benefit from LCA-based data concern cross-border
pollution, transaction costs following the adoption of environmental standards, adoption of less
polluting practices and/or technologies, and business-to-consumer information asymmetry. The
choice between the methodological options available for LCA studies (attributional, consequential, or
hybrid models) depends on the purpose and scope of the study. The possibility of integrating the LCA
with economic and social impact assessments—e.g., under the life cycle sustainability assessment
framework—makes LCA an excellent tool for monitoring business or sectoral-level achievements
with respect to UN 2030 Sustainable Development Goals.
Keywords: sustainable development goals; sustainability assessment; agricultural sustainability;
food security; LCA broadening; LCA deepening
1. Introduction
1.1. Background and Rationale behind the Study
The design and implementation of policy strategies towards agricultural sustainability and food
security should base on scientific evidence, to guarantee environmental protection and avoid burden
sharing, without reducing the productivity, competitiveness, and profitability of agri-food [1], thereby
allowing to meet UN 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), especially three interrelated goals,
i.e. SDG2, SDG13, and SDG15 [2,3]. The aim of SDG2 (no hunger) is to promote profound changes
in the way food is produced and consumed, for feeding the growing world population. Specific
targets involve ensuring sustainable food production systems and implementing resilient agricultural
practices, while doubling the agricultural productivity and farmers’ incomes. SDG13 (climate action)
has the objective of limiting the global temperature to rise. To that purpose, national governments
are called to implement climate mitigation policies and adaptation policies to promote the resilience
and adaptive capacity of socio-ecological systems. SDG15 (life on land) aims at preserving forests and
preventing desertification, land degradation, and biodiversity loss. The goal includes the promotion
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71; doi:10.3390/su11010071 211 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
of measures for preserving ecosystems and encourages governments to integrate ecosystem and
biodiversity values into national and local planning and development programs.
Among the sources of scientific evidence, information generated via life cycle assessment (LCA)
has received growing attention by policy-makers for identifying, selecting, and guiding interventions
to reduce the environmental burden of agriculture and food systems [4,5], as well as for setting the
objectives and monitoring the impacts of policies [6,7]. LCA is a formalized method (ISO 14040:2006;
ISO 14044:2006) (ISO, Geneva, Switzerland) and can be applied for monitoring the achievements
of the agricultural sector or single business with respect to SDGs [8]. Policy instruments based
on LCAs of traded commodities can mitigate carbon leakage and reduce food losses, by affecting
producer and consumer price, thus altering food production and consumption decisions [9,10]. Various
governments have set up publicly-available life cycle inventory databases for agricultural activities
(e.g., the USA [10], Australia [11], France [12]) and regularly require LCA in their funded research
projects [13]. Public investments in LCA research have helped the creation of the scientific knowledge
base for evidence-based policy-making [14].
A simple search (“life cycle assessment” AND “agriculture”) over major academic citation indexes
(viz. Scopus®, Web of ScienceTM) reveals the substantial and recent growth of LCA-based agricultural
research, including variously structured literature reviews. Refereed original research has covered
the impacts of major agricultural production systems (at least in advanced economies) and has
been largely synthesized to highlight, for example, the impacts associated with the production of
food [15]—including insects [16] and biofuels [17]—of management practices [18], and of human
diets [19], among others. Despite the wide scope for LCA application and development and the
growing interest by governments and the research community [20,21], LCA applications targeting
the decision-making process in agricultural policy is not so developed, when compared to other
economic sectors., with theoretical analyses being almost missing (see [22] for a notable exception).
The purpose of the article is not providing a systematic review or meta-analysis of impacts, which
are already available from the literature, e.g. [23,24]. Rather this article focuses on needed research
development to improve the policy orientation of LCA findings. In a forthcoming study, we will
expand on the objective of the present article by delivering a content analysis-based literature review
of the academic literature with explicit implications for agricultural policy community, focused on
needed research development to improve the policy orientation of LCA findings. Policy interest is
among the drivers of LCA popularity in agri-food research [20,25]. Despite that, much more research
is needed to adapt LCA studies to policy demand. Key challenges involve adopting innovative
perspectives on intervention strategies [26], improving data sources [25], as well as deepening and
broadening the LCA technique [27,28]. Drawing on those challenges, this article covers a series of
aspects of LCA application, namely research perspectives towards the mitigation of the environmental
burden of agricultural and food systems, the scope of the practical use of LCA-based information
for regulatory purposes, as well current obstacles to method diffusion and the opportunities for
improvement. The aim of the article is to propose a basis for discussion on the use of the LCA tool for
targeting and monitoring environmental policy interventions in agri-food, by bringing together and
discussing different theoretical and practical elements that should be considered when envisioning
LCA studies for agri-food sustainability, some of which were individually addressed by previous
research (e.g., [5,20,25,26,28,29]).
The paper aims at inspiring and promoting policy-oriented LCA research, thereby targeting both
researchers and policy makers.
1.2. Article Outline and Conceptual Model
A mutual relationship exists between the decision-making process and the evidence generated
in LCA studies, with practitioners needing to adjust the methodological approach based on the final
use of LCA outputs [30,31]. Figure 1 provides a conceptual representation of different elements of the
that relationship.
212
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
.
Figure 1. Conceptual model: mutual relationships between the different sections of the article. Source:
Authors’ own elaboration.
A key determinant of method and data source selection is decision-maker approach to impact
mitigation, which identify the stakeholders that are requested to implement actions aimed at impact
reduction. For example, technological innovation on firm may allow to reduce the environmental
burden of food supply. Contextually, adopting green marketing strategies to inform consumers about
the adoption of impact mitigation actions (e.g., food labelling) may increase the consumption of
more ecological foods. The type of application of LCA-based information is another determinant
of method selection. For example, decision-makers might be interested in learning the impacts of
a new technology or in comparing the impacts of two alternatives. When the focus is wider than
the business-level, decision makers might be interested in wider impact assessments, including for
example economic and social impacts. The role of research is addressing the limitation of the method
to improve the reinforcing feedback loops between existing LCA frameworks and decision makers
against that background.
Based on the conceptual model above, the present article is structured towards five more sections.
The next section provides a synthetic overview of the LCA method, focusing on the key elements
that distinguish major methodological approaches. The following section presents the approaches to
impact mitigation in agriculture and food systems. Section 4 concentrates on the practical application
of LCA-based information for public and private policy. Section 5 addresses method related limitations
and presents a series of approaches for dealing with those limitations. The last section presents a
discussion of the state-of-the art and delivers some recommendations.
2. Overview of the Method
LCA is the most comprehensive technique for tracing and generating quantitative information
about the environmental burdens that originate from the activities and facilities involved in
manufacturing, delivering, consuming, and managing the end-of-life of production processes or
of the average or marginal output of an industry, i.e., from cradle-to-grave [32]. The assessment has
been formalized by the International Standard Organization (ISO) (Geneva, Switzerland). Two ISO
(Geneva, Switzerland) rules provide general guidelines for the assessment, thereby allowing great
flexibility to practitioners. ISO 14040 (2006) (ISO, Geneva, Switzerland) delivers the principles and the
framework for the assessment, including the stepwise procedure, LCA reporting and critical review,
limitations of the assessment, and conditions for use of value choices and optional elements. ISO 14044
213
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
(2006) (ISO, Geneva, Switzerland) delivers a general guideline to the stepwise procedure, though not
providing methodological details about the practical implementation of LCA steps.
LCA is based on an iterative process with four steps, i.e., goal and scope definition, inventory
analysis, impact assessment, and interpretation. Based on the goal and scope, the assessment may
be narrowed to exclude upstream processes (gate-to-grave), downstream processes (cradle-to-gate)
or both (gate-to-gate), or even to exclude the impact assessment step. The latter are more properly
referred to as life cycle inventory studies. Life cycle inventories are datasets that account for all material
and energy flows and related emissions (via the application of characterization factors), through the
various processes within the system boundaries. Input flows refer to consumed natural resources,
materials and energy, output flows account for waste, emissions to air, water and soil, and the final
goods and services being produced. Input–output flows include variables that should be included in
the inventory—e.g., productivity, distance travelled, and type of transport—among others [31]. Based
on the part of the system that is under the direct influence of the decision maker, the product system
under study can be divided into foreground and background subsystems. The former includes the
processes that are directly affected by the decisions made in the study, both in terms of process type
and mode of operation; the latter includes the processes aimed at supplying material or energy to the
foreground subsystem [30]. When possible, the description of the foreground subsystem should rely on
primary data, while secondary or generic data can be used for the background subsystem [31]. Primary
data can be directly gathered—e.g., from farmers, food processors or other stakeholders, including
consumers—and may be aggregated or concern individual companies. Secondary data can be collected
from different sources, such as, for example, scientific literature, business or government reports.
In addition, many life cycle inventory databases are available, such as Ecoinvent® and Agrifootprint®.
As far as possible, inventories of foreground subsystems should rely on site-specific data [33], though
average or generic data may be preferred, depending on research aims [34].
Impact categorization and characterization occurs in the impact assessment step, via the
application of impact assessment models. The outputs cover a wide set of problem-oriented (midpoint)
or damage-oriented (endpoint), grouped under various impact categories, covering the depletion of
natural resources and damages to the environment and human health (an example of recommendations
about model and impact category selection is available from [31]). Via contribution analysis, LCA
outputs may be used for identifying the activities that most contribute to the environmental impacts
of a given product (hot spots), thereby facilitating the targeting of impact mitigation interventions at
the sectoral or business-level [29]. Stand-alone LCAs concentrate on a single product, generally for
exploratory purpose, while comparative studies aim at supporting product selection [35]. Assessments
covering single issues are known as footprint studies. Carbon and water footprints are popular
formalized methods (ISO 14067:2018 and ISO 14046:2014, respectively (ISO, Geneva, Switzerland)
for calculating and communicating the greenhouse gas emissions and freshwater consumption
associated with product life cycles [36]. Footprints are widely used for informing consumers about the
environmental performance of foodstuffs via food labelling.
The most widespread software programs for supporting product system modeling and assessment
by LCA practitioners are SimaPro® and GaBi®, though other software programs exist, e.g. openLCA®
or Umberto®. Software solutions include major life cycle inventory databases and impact assessment
models. LCA software tools are generally distributed under a licensing agreement to users, which
implies the payment of a fee, though open source software exists, notably openLCA®. Besides publicly
available life cycle inventory databases, access to commercial databases (e.g., Ecoinvent®) is generally
necessary for gathering data about background subsystems.
Conceptually, LCAs are divided into retrospective and prospective. Retrospective LCAs, or LCAs
of the accounting type [30], aim at describing the production of a given product in a system in terms
of materials and energy flows, before or after impact mitigation interventions, and the associated
environmental impacts; the latter are calculated based on average emissions for producing a unit of the
product in the system [37]. Prospective, or change-oriented [30], LCAs consider the environmentally
214
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
relevant flows in the production of a given product, for describing the consequences of possible
impact mitigation interventions (e.g., future policy), i.e., the effects of substitutions in the relevant
material and energy flows [37]. In prospective LCAs, system boundaries are expanded, even outside
cradle-to-grave system of the product under study, to include the activities introduced via substitution
and the associated emissions, with data referring to unitary changes in the relevant flows (marginal
data) [30,37]. Prospective LCA studies are especially suited for product development and the ex-ante
evaluation of public policies [35].
The division between retrospective and prospective LCA underpins the difference between the
attributional (ALCA) and consequential (CLCA) LCA models, respectively. ALCA is the conventional
model—formalized in the 1990s (ISO 14040: 1997) (ISO, Geneva, Switzerland)—which provides a static
picture of the impacts associated with all the processes included in the boundaries of the system under
study. CLCA—formally defined only in 2011 [38]—was developed for creating the connections between
environmental and economic models [39]. The purpose of CLCA is to quantify the market-mediated
consequences of decisions (measures to mitigate the environmental impact of productive activities)
concerning the system under study on other systems [5]. Instead of the processes included in the real
(or proposed) production system, CLCA studies, model the systems that are more likely to respond to
changes in demand due to the decisions taken to reduce the impacts on the environment (marginal
systems) [40]. For example, the diffusion of biogas-to-energy plants based on agricultural biomass can
reduce the demand for electricity from the national energy mix [41]. CLCA studies should consider
the interactions between agricultural and food policies and changes in consumer behavior [5]. Besides
the main product, agricultural supply chains often include intermediate products and by-products
(multifunctional processes), for example, calves in the production of cow’s milk. ALCA and CLCA
differ for the applied method for calculating the emissions associated with multifunctional processes.
The attributional model is usually based on allocation, the consequential on system expansion. The
allocation method relies on emission distribution among main products, intermediate products and
by-products, based on physical properties, such as mass or gross energy, or the market value of the
three types of output. The system expansion method considers intermediate products and by-products
as resulting from independent (external) production processes, i.e., different from the production
process that originate the main product. Those external processes turn to be included within system
boundaries, their relative impacts are calculated and subtracted from those of the multifunctional
process (saved impacts). CLCA is broader in scope than ALCA, accounting for the horizontal linkages
(e.g., competition for a good in alternative applications) at each step in the supply chain, whilst ALCA
concentrates on the vertical dependencies throughout the chain [42]. Moving to impact assessment, life
cycle impact assessment models for consequential studies model the consequences of one additional
unit of a given emission, rather than the average consequences of all emissions [43]. The main
drawback of CLCA is the high number of economic assumptions, which grows easily with the number
of processes included in the boundaries of the system and may be an important source of variability in
study results [44]. Many authors contrasted the key features of attributional and consequential LCAs,
in terms of aims of the studies, inputs from and implications for decision-making, and methodological
choices, including the way how systems are modeled [30,43,45–48]. The comparative appropriateness
and the potential for the complementary use of the two LCA models for political applications are the
subject of an open debate within the scientific community [42,44,49,50].
ISO 14040:2006 and 14044:2006 (ISO, Geneva, Switzerland) refer to ALCA and CLCA. Another
major approach to LCA exists that has not been covered by ISO (Geneva, Switzerland) rules—i.e.,
sector-based LCA, known as economic input–output LCA (EIO-LCA). EIO-LCA is an economy-wide
assessment of the environmental burdens caused by the business sector, its suppliers and suppliers’
suppliers. The assessment adopts a top-down approach by relying on economic input–output analysis
for tracing the interdependencies among economic sectors in a given region and giving the transactions
an economic value [51]. Sectoral level data from national economic input–output tables are extended
by adding a vector of total domestic direct and indirect environmental burdens, e.g., resource use or
215
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
emissions [52]. Generally, input–output tables do not cover the use and waste management phases
of products. Process-based data are often used to cover those life cycle stages. Hybrid LCA links
process-based (conventional) LCA with EIO-LCA. EIO-LCA is especially useful when real-world data
about given products and processes are not accessible and/or when practitioners are not familiar with
the characteristics of a certain industry [50]. However, process-based LCA, i.e. that quantifies the
impacts based on physical relations between activities in across product life cycle as standardized
in ISO (Geneva, Switzerland) rules, and EIO-LCA have opposite perspectives and different levels of
data resolution, which makes the selection of the approach strictly dependent on the objective of the
study, as well on its intended audience [51]. The works of [43,51] compare the key features of LCA and
EIO-LCA, evaluate their suitability for impact assessment at different level of analysis, and provide
recommendation for application.
3. Approaches to Impact Mitigation Strategies in Agriculture and Food Systems
Strategies to reduce the environmental impact of agricultural and food systems involve targeting
actions to the supply and/or the demand sides. The former includes the promotion of practices
that improve the environmental performance of agriculture, while preventing negative effects on
productivity [26]. The purpose of LCA studies is identifying hot spots and comparing management
or technological options for improving the environmental performance of single businesses or of
the whole sector [13,53]. For example, food packaging has received special attention by the food
industry [25]. The life cycle impacts of packaging grow with product water content [54] and, e.g.,
account for most impacts of wine, especially due to the production and disposal of glass bottles [55].
However, wine consumers may not be willing to accept different packaging materials (e.g., plastics) [56].
So far, supply-side actions have received the greatest attention by researchers [26].
Largely policy-driven, demand-side actions aim at changing consumption patterns to reduce
the demand for the most impacting foods [57], e.g., products of animal origin (in particular dairy
products and meat of ruminants), those deriving from conventional agriculture [58,59] or that require
water-intensive agronomic practices (e.g., rice) [60]. The reduction of food waste is an additional
demand-side strategy [57], which, however, has shown a limited impact mitigation potential compared
to dietary change [61]. The adoption of impact mitigating practices and/or technologies still occurs
in the supply side, but their implementation is mediated by market forces [26]. Regulatory options
to promote changes and encourage sustainable consumption generally involve acting on consumer
information and education, to raise awareness and policy acceptability [62]. LCA applications involve
the comparison of different consumption patterns via the calculation of environmental/nutritional
trade-offs associated with the reduction, removal, or substitution of animal-based foods [63]. Compared
to supply-side actions, research focusing on the demand side is more recent and has raised the interest
and support of more and more research [25]. A key challenge involves addressing the feedback loops
between dietary alterations for human health. The LCA literature contributed to answering that
challenge mainly by assessing the environmental impacts of diets differing in the content of meat and
dairy or by assessing environmental impacts of healthier diets [63]. The former generally compare
current consumption patterns (i.e., self-selected diets, generally based on food consumption surveys)
against official dietary guidelines and/or other popular type of diets (e.g., vegetarian). The second
strand of literature has the nutritional quality of the assessed diets at its core (e.g., [64]). Mainly, the
authors propose considering the restriction of the total energy intake as an impact mitigation strategy
and to carefully model the choice of meat replacement foods, to avoid burden shifts associated for
example with the consumption of greater quantities of food, due to the lower energy density, and of
the increased demand of imported or out-of-season foods [65].
Supply and demand side approaches could be combined to promote system-level actions, subject
the communication and collaboration among the involved stakeholders [26], such as private businesses
(supply side), the public (demand side), governments (resource-use regulation), and researchers and
practitioners (impact assessment and monitoring) [66]. To that purpose, the conceptualization and
216
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
implementation of LCA studies should concern redesigned models of agricultural and food systems
(scenarios) that propose sustainable synergetic solutions [61,67]. An example of agri-food system
redesign involves the application of the concept of “ecological leftovers” [68], which, though promising,
needs more empirical research to be effectively proposed for real world applications, especially for
knowing more about its cultural acceptability [69].
4. Policy Applications of LCA Results
Information originating from LCA studies is used in policy-making to face four broad
challenges, viz. pollution leakage, ex-post transaction costs of environmental regulation, adoption
of environmentally least harmful (technological) options, and business-to-consumer information
asymmetry [20]. Pollution leakage is the increase in total pollution outside the policy jurisdiction where
the investigated process occurs, in response to a decrease in total pollution within the same jurisdiction,
which, e.g., could occur in case of indirect land use change from food to energy cropping [70]. The
costs of administration, monitoring, and enforcement of environmental regulation can be high when
(potential) polluters are many and heterogeneous, thus making emission monitoring a very costly
activity [20]. On one hand, transaction costs may be reduced by monitoring a set of key upstream
activities that produce widespread raw materials, e.g., fossil fuels [71]. On the other hand, extended
producer responsibility policies have grown in the last two decades, which give producers a significant
financial and/or physical responsibility for the treatment or disposal of post-consumer products,
in exchange of incentives to prevent waste creation and promote eco-friendly product design [72].
Policy support of the adoption of environmentally least harmful options is widespread across countries
(for example, the payments to farmers that adopt practices beneficial for the environment under the
Common Agricultural Policy of the EU [73]) and may encompass incentives for developers and/or
adopters of innovations [74]. Business-to-consumer information asymmetry occurs when the attributes
of products are credence qualities; eliciting information about some of those attributes through
environmental labelling reduces information asymmetry, by providing the product with experience
qualities, e.g., implemented production practices, emissions occurred during production, type of
energy sources, water consumption, among others [75]. However, the effectiveness of environmental
labels in conveying the intended information and orienting consumption patterns are subject to
consumer education and proper label design [76,77].
To face the four challenges above, [20] classified the application of data generated via LCA (stand
alone, retrospective or prospective studies) under three domains, i.e., pure information for decision
makers, passive regulation, active regulation. The first type of application is generally intended for
providing decision-makers with new knowledge about the impacts of existing or innovative products,
practices or technologies. This can be done via stand-alone or comparative LCAs [35]. Passive
regulation applications aim at informing the choice among multiple options (e.g., processes, scenarios).
Data can be used to target public support towards specific products, technologies, production practices,
or end-of-life management via recommendations, labelling or qualification schemes, mandatory targets
or incentives to production/consumption of a given product. Lastly, LCA can drive active regulation
when highlighting specific parameters that can form the basis, e.g., for an incentive, tax, or subsidy, or
for the design of an environmental performance standard. To inform passive or active regulation, LCA
studies should be comparative prospective or retrospective [35]. Within the domains of passive and
active regulation, policy and business decision makers may also benefit from further elaborations of
LCA outputs, e.g., when needing to consider consumer preferences. Food labelling is a typical example,
as label design and the way how information about products’ emissions (e.g., qualitative or quantitative
information) is presented affect consumers’ choices [77]. To identify preferences, behavioral economists
generally evaluate consumers’ willingness to pay for different food/label attributes. This research
approach can also evaluate whether adopting a given labelling scheme is an effective differentiation
strategy for farmers and what price premiums can be applied to least emitting products [78].
217
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
5. Limitations of the Method and Opportunities for Improvement
LCA has evolved from a tool for managing resource use on firm, through a method for
monitoring energy use over the production process and for complying with overarching emission
reduction mandates, to a metric that drives and is embedded in policy-making [5], including policy
evaluation [6,7]. However, a series of improvements may benefit the diffusion of the tool, especially
concerning study harmonization, data issues, and the inclusion of economic and social aspects.
5.1. Study Harmonization
Besides data sources, the flexibility of ISO (Geneva, Switzerland) rules has raised concerns
about the credibility, transparency, complexity, and communication ability of LCA studies, which
can possibly interfere with LCA applications for policy and strategic planning [5]. For example,
ISO (Geneva, Switzerland) do not strictly specify how to define the functional units or reference
flows and system boundaries, how to select the rules for quantifying the impacts associated with
multifunctional processes or how to establish the environmentally relevant impact categories. This
wide margin of discretion left to practitioners has been seriously criticized, because the operational
choices can generate different and often incomparable results [79]. To overcome those issues, ISO
(Geneva, Switzerland) guidelines should be deepened, i.e., revised to include more detailed definitions
and stricter rules, to allow greater uniformity among the architecture of different LCA studies, thereby
improving the reliability and comparability of findings, as well as widening the scope of results
applicability [80]. Trying and answer the need for greater harmonization in the analytical protocols
of LCA studies, the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre proposed detailed guidelines for
the calculation of products’ life cycle impacts (Product Environmental Footprint; Recommendation
2013/179/EU). The adoption of a voluntary environmental certification based on LCA (Type III
Environmental Declarations ISO 14025:2006, which base on LCA) (ISO, Geneva, Switzerland), also
implies the compliance with stricter rules than the ISO (Geneva, Switzerland), providing guidance on
data quality requirements and on the selection of environmentally relevant impact categories, among
others. The Environmental Product Declaration (EPD®) and the Carbon Footprint of Products are
examples of those certifications. Certification adoption by a company allows the producer to provide
the product with environmental claims and facilitates comparative assertions.
5.2. Data Issues
LCA is a data-intensive method. Gathering all the necessary data to carry out the assessment is not
an easy task. Data originate great concerns within the research community. Primary data collection can
be prohibitively expensive [10] and often secondary data cannot cover the lack of information about the
processes under study [25]. For agri-food databases, greater transparency is required on data collection,
the harmonization of different databases, to facilitate the use of more than one of them, the definition
of net boundaries between the technosphere and the ecosphere and the incorporation of spatial
variability [25]. The databases should also be updated with innovative and pilot technologies currently
available to entrepreneurs [13] and allow their users to address cross-cutting issues, such as food
losses along the supply chain, end-of-life treatment technologies [81,82], and the impact of different
packaging materials [81,83]. Such improvements are additional aspects of LCA deepening [80].
5.3. Inclusion of Economic and Social Aspects
Another problem of LCA studies is being limited to environmental aspects, omitting economic
and social aspects, of great importance to decision makers [79]. The approach for overcoming
this problem, known as broadening, involves extending the analysis to the economic and/or
social dimensions of sustainability [80]. Research approaches to LCA combinations with various
economic assessment and decision-support tools are not recent—e.g., multicriteria decision making
analysis [84], stochastic optimization [85], full cost accounting [86]—and have been extensively
218
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
reviewed [87]. When one can assume a fixed structure of the economy, many authors have turned
to environmental input–output-LCA (EIO-LCA) [88–91]. EIO-LCA can eliminate the arbitrariness in
system boundary’s definition, thereby helping to cope with truncation errors [92]. LCA combination
with data envelopment analysis (DEA) is promising, by linking engineering, life sciences, and social
sciences, and delivering estimates over the three dimensions of sustainability, thereby improving policy
targeting [13,93]. Many examples of LCA combinations with DEA are available from the scientific
literature [94]. Compared to other economic sectors, combined DEA-LCA studies in agri-food are
few (see [95] for an example). Further improvements may arise from the use of system dynamics
modelling to correct model estimates, e.g., with respect to temporal effects, rebound effects, and
uncertainty [96]. Compared to economic aspects, LCA combination with social impact assessments has
received less attention by researchers, though being key to allow consumer acceptability of innovative
food production and consumption systems [69]. The growing popularity of life cycle sustainability
assessment (LCSA) has mitigated this knowledge gap, by promoting the combination of LCA with life
cycle cost accounting (life cycle costing) and social LCA. LCSA has raised the interest of policy makers,
delivering synthetic information on the three dimensions of sustainability that largely base on the same
data sources [97,98]. The availability of data on impacts on several dimensions is particularly important
in the assessment of debated innovations, for example in the context of the bioeconomy [13]. The
adoption of a more holistic methodological approach would also allow to consider the possible effects
associated with changes in the use of production factors and yields of production processes, resulting
from the large-scale implementation of environmental mitigation measures (rebound effects) [22].
Especially, the adoption of participatory approaches may help with the identification of rebound
effects and the possible ways to address them, via the collaboration among supply chain stakeholders,
consumers, authorities, and waste-handlers [81]. LCA applications under this perspective need further
research, especially for developing indicators against which to measure progress, for incorporating
concepts such as human agency and moral responsibility, and for considering the dynamic interactions
between economic values and health outcomes of different production systems [26].
6. Discussion and Recommendations
The scientific literature proposes to address the necessary reduction of the environmental impacts
agriculture and food systems via the public support to innovation (practices, technologies) to improve
resource management efficiency on firm (supply-side), or to facilitate the change in food consumption
patterns with indirect effects on food supply (demand-side), or to interventions addressing both the
supply and demand-sides that require the collaboration of supply chain stakeholders (system level
interventions). LCA is a scientifically robust tool for calculating the impacts of agricultural systems,
affected or not by pollution reduction measures. LCA studies investigate and/or compare and
immediately communicate the environmental impacts of—e.g., farming methods, input management
systems, technologies, or consumer behavior—and can support evidence-based policy making in
agriculture and food systems. Information about product impacts can help to provide the basis for
establishing legal limits on emissions (e.g., carbon tax) or entry levels to access public tenders (e.g.,
green public procurement). In agri-food, the policies that benefit most from such information concern
cross-border pollution, transaction costs associated with the application of environmental standards,
the adoption of less polluting practices or technologies, and the reduction of information asymmetry
business-to-consumer. Given the growing consumer sensitivity towards the environmental impacts
of agri-food products, environmental certifications and labelling are the most significant example of
the opportunities LCA offer to the agribusiness, in terms of product positioning on the domestic and
export markets. Concerned consumers are willing to pay a price premium for environmental label on
foods [78,99]. However, labels’ effectiveness in orienting consumer decisions does not depend just on
the type of impact information conveyed [76]. Often, consumers are not aware of the estimates behind
the label; moreover, multiple labels exit that can create consumer confusion. Confusion may also arise
between environmental declarations (product certifications) and process certifications, e.g., organic
219
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
farming [100]. Then asymmetric information remain unsolved [101]. Label design is critical to allow
the clarity of information delivery and then reduce consumer confusion [102]. Labels should help
comparisons within and across food products, use consistent and accessible units of measure, be able
to communicate the sustainability criteria behind footprint calculation [77]. Coherent, comprehensive,
and cohesive carbon labelling policy, coupled with dedicated social learning campaigns, may help
to achieve policy objectives [76,103]. In addition, policy makers should monitor the proliferation
of sustainability labels, to play a credible and appropriate role in the development of certification
schemes [99].
Improving product positioning is the main drivers for entrepreneurs to adopt an environmental
certification [104]. However, certification adoption implies a series of costs associated with the adoption
itself and with the requirements the firm need to meet through time to be eligible for the certification
scheme, including the adaptation of production facilities [105]. More studies are needed that consider
the combined environmental, economic, and social impacts of certification adoption in agribusiness, to
evaluate the extent to which the value added associated with certification adoption can be distributed
among supply chain stakeholders and to verify if farmers are incentivized to modify their production
practices and technologies or are “forced” by the market [106]. Food labels allow the direct comparison
of substitutes. However, the extent to which food labels can influence purchasing decisions depends
not only on the clarity of the conveyed information, but also on consumers’ ability to understand that
information [76]. Therefore, entrepreneurs in the agri-food sector wishing to promote their products
as “ecological” should pay attention to consumer attitudes, to decide on the type of information and
the way how to present it via label design for encouraging purchases [77]. The implementation of
consumer education campaigns could improve the effectiveness of demand-side interventions [103].
This is especially relevant when it comes to the promotion of sustainable diets [63,69].
While the high environmental impacts of ruminant meat consumption are recognized, many
studies assume that the adoption of more plant-based diets may benefit both health and the
environment, without considering the energy density of meat-replacement foods [63]. Besides,
decision makers and researchers should consider the potential risk for nutrient deficiencies and the
resulting potential increase in the demand for fortified foods or food supplements [107]. To allow the
effective promotion of new dietary models, more LCA studies are needed that consider the trade-offs
between impact mitigation and health and nutritional outcomes of dietary shifts, also by adopting an
epidemiological approach [65]. To inform evidence-based policy, the LCAs of diets should be based
on more insightful indicators of nutritional quality, rather than just focusing on macronutrients [65].
More consumer studies are needed to assess the cultural acceptability and affordability of low impact
diets [65,69].
Researchers’ choices among the several methodological options for carrying out a LCA depend
on the purpose and scope of the study. CLCA should be preferred when it is necessary to link
environmental and economic models, while EIO-LCA can be useful to correct for method limitations,
in specific circumstances [108]. In general, LCA is not without criticism [21] and alternative approaches
had many applications in agricultural research, e.g., multi-region input–output analysis [109,110],
data envelopment analysis [111], or structural path and structural decomposition analyses [112],
among others.
LCA is just one the many sustainability assessment tools and different classifications frameworks
exist (see [113] for an overview). For example, indicator-based assessments rely on sustainability
indicators, presenting simple information, generally quantitative, about a state of economic, social
and/or environmental development in a given region, which may be useful for communicating trends
and for non-specialized audience [114]. Monetary assessments, notably cost–benefit, give the costs
and benefits of the system under monetary values. The system is evaluated against a benchmark,
e.g., some wealth indexes of the measure of the private/public stream of social costs and benefits
of alternative systems [115]. Rather than focusing on products, cost–benefit analysis is used for
evaluating public or private investment proposals, e.g. by weighing the costs of the project against
220
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
the expected benefits [114] (see [116] for a detailed comparison among LCA, life cycle costing and
cost–benefit analysis). Other methods are at least conceptually close to LCA. For example, being
a product-related tool that focuses on the flows associated with the production and consumption
of a good, LCA is related to material flow analysis, though concentrating on product-related flows
instead of region-related flows [114]. Multicriteria analysis is another widespread tool for sustainability
assessment, which can be used when the evaluation needs to consider competing criteria. The method
involves the collection of data about the perceived impacts (environmental, economic, social) by supply
chain stakeholders [117] and preference synthesis through modeling algorithms [118]. Multicriteria
analysis and LCA can usefully complement each other [119].
The sustainable transition towards sustainable agriculture and food systems should involve
the evaluation of economic and social aspects. The possibility of integrating LCA within the more
comprehensive LCSA framework would improve the suitability of the tool for sustainable development
studies, as well as for applications in business, e.g., for supporting and communicating ecological
innovation [28]. Greater research efforts to understand farmers’ attitudes towards environmentally
sound practices and technologies could suggest which interventions are most likely to be undertaken
and which policies could be effective in promoting their adoption [120].
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, O.G.; Investigation, O.G., F.B., and F.V.; Writing—original draft
preparation, O.G.; Writing—review and editing, O.G., F.B., and F.V.; Supervision, F.B. and A.Z.; Project
administration, G.B. and A.P.; Funding acquisition, G.B., A.Z., and A.P.
Funding: This research was funded by the University of Pisa, project SALI (Strumenti di sostenibilità delle produzioni
alimentari, Sustainability tools for food production) code PRA_2017_34.
Acknowledgments: The authors thank Silvia Coderoni, from Marche Polytechnic University, for useful comments
to previous versions of the paper.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.
References
1. Van Tongeren, F. Agricultural Policy Design and Implementation. A Synthesis; Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development: Paris, France, 2008; p. 32.
2. About the Sustainable Development Goals. Available online: https://www.un.org/
sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/ (accessed on 9 October 2018).
3. Transforming Food and Agriculture to Achieve the SDGs; Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
Nations: Rome, Italy, 2018; ISBN 978-92-5-130626-0.
4. Guinée, J.B.; Heijungs, R.; Huppes, G.; Zamagni, A.; Masoni, P.; Buonamici, R.; Ekvall, T.; Rydberg, T. Life
Cycle Assessment: Past, Present, and Future. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, 45, 90–96. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. McManus, M.C.; Taylor, C.M. The changing nature of life cycle assessment. Biomass Bioenergy 2015, 82, 13–26.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Sala, S.; Reale, F.; Cristobal-Garcia, J.; Pant, R. Life Cycle Assessment for the Impact Assessment of Policies;
Publications Office: Luxembourg, 2016; ISBN 978-92-79-64813-7.
7. Reale, F.; Cinelli, M.; Sala, S. Towards a research agenda for the use of LCA in the impact assessment of
policies. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 2017, 22, 1477–1481. [CrossRef]
8. Goedkoop, M.; Martinez, E.V.; de Beer, I. LCA as the Tool to Measure Progress towards the Sustainable Development
Goals; LIST: Luxembourg, 2017.
9. Huang, H.; von Lampe, M.; van Tongeren, F. Climate change and trade in agriculture. Food Policy 2011, 36,
S9–S13. [CrossRef]
10. Tsiboe, F.; Nalley, L.L.; Durand, A.; Greg, T.; Aaron, S. The Economic and Environmental Benefits of Sheath
Blight Resistance in Rice. J. Agric. Resour. Econ. 2017, 42, 215–235.
11. AusLCI—The Australian Life Cycle Inventory Database Initiative. Available online: http://www.auslci.
com.au/index.php/datasets/Agriculture (accessed on 9 October 2018).
221
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
12. Agribalyse Program. Available online: https://www.ademe.fr/en/expertise/alternative-approaches-toproduction/
agribalyse-program (accessed on 9 October 2018).
13. Viaggi, D. Research and innovation in agriculture: Beyond productivity? Bio-Based Appl. Econ. 2015, 4,
279–300.
14. Sonnemann, G.; Gemechu, E.D.; Sala, S.; Schau, E.M.; Allacker, K.; Pant, R.; Adibi, N.; Valdivia, S. Life
Cycle Thinking and the Use of LCA in Policies Around the World. In Life Cycle Assessment; Hauschild, M.Z.,
Rosenbaum, R.K., Olsen, S.I., Eds.; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 429–463.
ISBN 978-3-319-56474-6.
15. Roy, P.; Nei, D.; Orikasa, T.; Xu, Q.; Okadome, H.; Nakamura, N.; Shiina, T. A review of life cycle assessment
(Lca) on some food products. J. Food Eng. 2009, 90, 1–10. [CrossRef]
16. Van Huis, A.; Oonincx, D.G.A.B. The environmental sustainability of insects as food and feed. A review.
Agron. Sustain. Dev. 2017, 37, 43. [CrossRef]
17. Gnansounou, E.; Dauriat, A.; Villegas, J.; Panichelli, L. Life cycle assessment of biofuels: Energy and
greenhouse gas balances. Bioresour. Technol. 2009, 100, 4919–4930. [CrossRef]
18. Gomiero, T.; Pimentel, D.; Paoletti, M.G. Environmental Impact of Different Agricultural Management
Practices: Conventional vs. Organic Agriculture. Crit. Rev. Plant Sci. 2011, 30, 95–124. [CrossRef]
19. Martin, M.; Brandão, M. Evaluating the Environmental Consequences of Swedish Food Consumption and
Dietary Choices. Sustainability 2017, 9, 2227. [CrossRef]
20. Rajagopal, D.; Vanderghem, C.; MacLean, H.L. Life Cycle Assessment for Economists. Annu. Rev. Resour.
Econ. 2017, 9, 361–381. [CrossRef]
21. Freidberg, S. Calculating sustainability in supply chain capitalism. Econ. Soc. 2013, 42, 571–596. [CrossRef]
22. Benedetto, G.; Rugani, B.; Vázquez-Rowe, I. Rebound effects due to economic choices when assessing the
environmental sustainability of wine. Food Policy 2014, 49, 167–173. [CrossRef]
23. Aleksandrowicz, L.; Green, R.; Joy, E.J.M.; Smith, P.; Haines, A. The Impacts of Dietary Change on Greenhouse
Gas Emissions, Land Use, Water Use, and Health: A Systematic Review. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0165797.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Clark, M.; Tilman, D. Comparative analysis of environmental impacts of agricultural production systems,
agricultural input efficiency, and food choice. Environ. Res. Lett. 2017, 12, 064016. [CrossRef]
25. Notarnicola, B.; Sala, S.; Anton, A.; McLaren, S.J.; Saouter, E.; Sonesson, U. The role of life cycle assessment
in supporting sustainable agri-food systems: A review of the challenges. J. Clean. Prod. 2017, 140, 399–409.
[CrossRef]
26. Garnett, T. Three perspectives on sustainable food security: Efficiency, demand restraint, food system
transformation. What role for life cycle assessment? J. Clean. Prod. 2014, 73, 10–18. [CrossRef]
27. Onat, N.; Kucukvar, M.; Halog, A.; Cloutier, S. Systems Thinking for Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment:
A Review of Recent Developments, Applications, and Future Perspectives. Sustainability 2017, 9, 706.
[CrossRef]
28. Zamagni, A.; Masoni, P.; Buttol, P.; Raggi, A.; Buonamici, R. Finding Life Cycle Assessment Research
Direction with the Aid of Meta-Analysis. J. Ind. Ecol. 2012, 16, S39–S52. [CrossRef]
29. Hellweg, S.; Mila i Canals, L. Emerging approaches, challenges and opportunities in life cycle assessment.
Science 2014, 344, 1109–1113. [PubMed]
30. Tillman, A.-M. Significance of decision-making for LCA methodology. Environ. Impact Assess. Rev. 2000, 20,
113–123.
31. Hiederer, R. International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook: General Guide for Life Cycle
Assessment: Provisions and Action Steps; Publications Office: Luxembourg, 2011; ISBN 978-92-79-17451-3.
32. Sala, S.; Ciuffo, B.; Nijkamp, P. A systemic framework for sustainability assessment. Ecol. Econ. 2015, 119,
314–325.
33. Schaltegger, S. Economics of life cycle assessment: Inefficiency of the present approach. Bus. Strategy Environ.
1997, 6, 1–8. [CrossRef]
34. Zimmermann, P.; Frischknecht, R.; Ménard, M. Background Inventory Data. In Life Cycle Assessment
(LCA) —Quo Vadis? Schaltegger, S., Braunschweig, A., Büchel, K., Dinkel, F., Frischknecht, R., Maillefer, C.,
Ménard, M., Peter, D., Pohl, C., Ros, M., et al., Eds.; Themenhefte Schwerpunktprogramm Umwelt;
Birkhäuser Basel: Basel, Switzerland, 1996; pp. 39–49, ISBN 978-3-0348-9022-9.
222
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
35. Baumann, H.; Tillman, A.-M. The Hitch Hikers’s Guide to LCA: An Orientation in Life Cycle Assessment
Methodology and Application; Studentlitteratur: Lund, Sweden, 2004; ISBN 978-91-44-02364-9.
36. Galli, A.;Wiedmann, T.; Ercin, E.; Knoblauch, D.; Ewing, B.; Giljum, S. Integrating Ecological, Carbon and
Water footprint into a “Footprint Family” of indicators: Definition and role in tracking human pressure on
the planet. Ecol. Indic. 2012, 16, 100–112. [CrossRef]
37. Ekvall, T.; Tillman, A.-M.; Molander, S. Normative ethics and methodology for life cycle assessment. J. Clean.
Prod. 2005, 13, 1225–1234. [CrossRef]
38. Global Guidance Principles for Life Cycle Assessment Databases: A Basis for Greener Processes and Products: “Shonan
Guidance Principles”; United Nations Environment Programme: Nairobi, Kenya, 2011.
39. Earles, J.M.; Halog, A. Consequential life cycle assessment: A review. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 2011, 16,
445–453. [CrossRef]
40. Schmidt, J.H.;Weidema, B.P. Shift in the marginal supply of vegetable oil. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 2008, 13,
235–239.
41. Van Stappen, F.; Mathot, M.; Decruyenaere, V.; Loriers, A.; Delcour, A.; Planchon, V.; Goffart, J.-P.; Stilmant, D.
Consequential environmental life cycle assessment of a farm-scale biogas plant. J. Environ. Manag. 2016, 175,
20–32.
42. Rajagopal, D. Consequential Life Cycle Assessment of Policy Vulnerability to Price Effects: CLCA of Policy
Vulnerability to Price Effects. J. Ind. Ecol. 2014, 18, 164–175.
43. Weidema, B.P.; Ekvall, T.; Heijungs, R. Guidelines for Application of Deepened and Broadened LCA—Deliverable
D18 of Work Packag e 5 of the CALCAS Project; CALCAS—Co-ordination Action for innovation in Life-Cycle
Analysis for Sustainability: Colorado Springs, CO, USA, 2009; p. 49.
44. Rajagopal, D.; Zilberman, D. On market-mediated emissions and regulations on life cycle emissions. Ecol.
Econ. 2013, 90, 77–84. [CrossRef]
45. Weidema, B.P. Market Information in Life Cycle Assessment; Danish Environmental Protection Agency:
København, Denmark, 2003; p. 147.
46. Weidema, B.P.; Pizzol, M.; Schmidt, J.; Thoma, G. Attributional or consequential Life Cycle Assessment: A
matter of social responsibility. J. Clean. Prod. 2018, 174, 305–314. [CrossRef]
47. Brander, M.; Tipper, R.; Hutchison, C.; Davis, G. Consequential and Attributional Approaches to Lca: A
Guide to Policy Makers with Specific Reference to Greenhouse Gas Lca of Biofuels; Technical Paper; Ecometrica,
2009. Available online: https://ecometrica.com/white-papers/consequential-and-attributional-approachesto-
lca-a-guide-to-policy-makers-with-specific-reference-to-greenhouse-gas-lca-of-biofuels (accessed on
4 December 2018).
48. Ekvall, T.; Azapagic, A.; Finnveden, G.; Rydberg, T.; Weidema, B.P.; Zamagni, A. Attributional and
consequential LCA in the ILCD handbook. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 2016, 21, 293–296. [CrossRef]
49. Creutzig, F.; Popp, A.; Plevin, R.; Luderer, G.; Minx, J.; Edenhofer, O. Reconciling top-down and bottom-up
modelling on future bioenergy deployment. Nat. Clim. Chang. 2012, 2, 320–327. [CrossRef]
50. Baitz, M.; Albrecht, S.; Brauner, E.; Broadbent, C.; Castellan, G.; Conrath, P.; Fava, J.; Finkbeiner, M.;
Fischer, M.; Fullana i Palmer, P.; et al. LCA’s theory and practice: Like ebony and ivory living in perfect
harmony? Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 2013, 18, 5–13. [CrossRef]
51. Reimann, K.; Finkbeiner, M.; Horvath, A.; Matsuno, Y. Evaluation of Environmental Life Cycle Approaches
for Policy and Decision Making Support in Micro and Macro Level Applications; European Commission, Joint
Research Centre, Institute for Evironment and Sustainability: Copenhagen, Denmark, 2010; p. 188.
52. Tukker, A.; Huppes, G.; van Oers, L.; Heijungs, R. Environmentally Extended input-Output Tables and Models
for Europe; Eutopean Commission, Joint Research Centre, Institute for Prospective Technological Studies:
Seville, Spain, 2010; p. 120.
53. Garnett, T. Where are the best opportunities for reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the food system
(including the food chain)? Food Policy 2011, 36, S23–S32. [CrossRef]
54. Silvenius, F.; Katajajuuri, J.-M.; Grönman, K.; Soukka, R.; Koivupuro, H.-K.; Virtanen, Y. Role of Packaging
in LCA of Food Products. In Towards Life Cycle Sustainability Management; Finkbeiner, M., Ed.; Springer
Netherlands: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2011; pp. 359–370. ISBN 978-94-007-1898-2.
55. Ferrara, C.; De Feo, G. Life Cycle Assessment Application to theWine Sector: A Critical Review. Sustainability
2018, 10, 395. [CrossRef]
223
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
56. Vázquez-Rowe, I.; Villanueva-Rey, P.; Moreira, M.T.; Feijoo, G. Environmental analysis of Ribeiro wine from
a timeline perspective: Harvest year matters when reporting environmental impacts. J. Environ. Manag.
2012, 98, 73–83. [CrossRef]
57. Godfray, H.C.J.; Beddington, J.R.; Crute, I.R.; Haddad, L.; Lawrence, D.; Muir, J.F.; Pretty, J.; Robinson, S.;
Thomas, S.M.; Toulmin, C. Food Security: The Challenge of Feeding 9 Billion People. Science 2010, 327,
812–818. [CrossRef]
58. Meier, M.S.; Stoessel, F.; Jungbluth, N.; Juraske, R.; Schader, C.; Stolze, M. Environmental impacts of organic
and conventional agricultural products—Are the differences captured by life cycle assessment? J. Environ.
Manag. 2015, 149, 193–208. [CrossRef]
59. Herrero, M.; Henderson, B.; Havlík, P.; Thornton, P.K.; Conant, R.T.; Smith, P.;Wirsenius, S.; Hristov, A.N.;
Gerber, P.; Gill, M.; et al. Greenhouse gas mitigation potentials in the livestock sector. Nat. Clim. Chang. 2016,
6, 452–461. [CrossRef]
60. Blengini, G.A.; Busto, M. The life cycle of rice: LCA of alternative agri-food chain management systems in
Vercelli (Italy). J. Environ. Manag. 2009, 90, 1512–1522. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61. Bryngelsson, D.; Wirsenius, S.; Hedenus, F.; Sonesson, U. How can the EU climate targets be met? A
combined analysis of technological and demand-side changes in food and agriculture. Food Policy 2016, 59,
152–164. [CrossRef]
62. Policies to Encourage Sustainable Consumption: Full Report; Publications Office: Luxembourg, 2012;
ISBN 978-92-79-25952-4.
63. Garnett, T. Plating up solutions. Science 2016, 353, 1202–1204. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Vieux, F.; Soler, L.-G.; Touazi, D.; Darmon, N. High nutritional quality is not associated with low greenhouse
gas emissions in self-selected diets of French adults. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2013, 97, 569–583. [CrossRef]
65. Perignon, M.; Vieux, F.; Soler, L.-G.; Masset, G.; Darmon, N. Improving diet sustainability through evolution
of food choices: Review of epidemiological studies on the environmental impact of diets. Nutr. Rev. 2017, 75,
2–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Friedman, A.L.; Miles, S. Stakeholders: Theory and Practice; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK; New York,
NY, USA, 2006; ISBN 978-0-19-926987-7.
67. Dwivedi, S.L.; Lammerts van Bueren, E.T.; Ceccarelli, S.; Grando, S.; Upadhyaya, H.D.; Ortiz, R. Diversifying
Food Systems in the Pursuit of Sustainable Food Production and Healthy Diets. Trends Plant Sci. 2017, 22,
842–856. [CrossRef]
68. Garnett, T. Livestock-related greenhouse gas emissions: Impacts and options for policy makers. Environ. Sci.
Policy 2009, 12, 491–503. [CrossRef]
69. Röös, E.; Patel, M.; Spångberg, J.; Carlsson, G.; Rydhmer, L. Limiting livestock production to pasture and
by-products in a search for sustainable diets. Food Policy 2016, 58, 1–13. [CrossRef]
70. Rajagopal, D. On mitigating emissions leakage under biofuel policies. GCB Bioenergy 2016, 8, 471–480.
[CrossRef]
71. Metcalf, G.E.; Weisbach, D.A. The Design of a Carbon Tax. Harv. Environ. Law Rev. 2009, 33, 499–556.
[CrossRef]
72. Walls, M. Extended Producer Responsibility and Product Design: Economic Theory and Selected Case Studies;
Resource for the Future: Washington, DC, USA, 2006.
73. Greening. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/direct-support/greening_en (accessed on
9 October 2018).
74. Zilberman, D.; Zhao, J.; Heiman, A. Adoption Versus Adaptation, with Emphasis on Climate Change. Annu.
Rev. Resour. Econ. 2012, 4, 27–53. [CrossRef]
75. Caswell, J.A.; Mojduszka, E.M. Using Informational Labeling to Influence the Market for Quality in Food
Products. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 1996, 78, 1248–1253. [CrossRef]
76. Gadema, Z.; Oglethorpe, D. The use and usefulness of carbon labelling food: A policy perspective from a
survey of UK supermarket shoppers. Food Policy 2011, 36, 815–822. [CrossRef]
77. Leach, A.M.; Emery, K.A.; Gephart, J.; Davis, K.F.; Erisman, J.W.; Leip, A.; Pace, M.L.; D’Odorico, P.; Carr, J.;
Noll, L.C.; et al. Environmental impact food labels combining carbon, nitrogen, and water footprints. Food
Policy 2016, 61, 213–223. [CrossRef]
78. Akaichi, F.; Nayga, R.M.; Nalley, L.L. Are there trade-offs in valuation with respect to greenhouse gas
emissions, origin and food miles attributes? Eur. Rev. Agric. Econ. 2017, 44, 3–31. [CrossRef]
224
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
79. Boons, F.; Baumann, H.; Hall, J. Conceptualizing sustainable development and global supply chains. Ecol.
Econ. 2012, 83, 134–143. [CrossRef]
80. Jeswani, H.K.; Azapagic, A.; Schepelmann, P.; Ritthoff, M. Options for broadening and deepening the LCA
approaches. J. Clean. Prod. 2010, 18, 120–127. [CrossRef]
81. Halloran, A.; Clement, J.; Kornum, N.; Bucatariu, C.; Magid, J. Addressing food waste reduction in Denmark.
Food Policy 2014, 49, 294–301. [CrossRef]
82. Castellani, V.; Sala, S.; Benini, L. Hotspots analysis and critical interpretation of food life cycle assessment
studies for selecting eco-innovation options and for policy support. J. Clean. Prod. 2017, 140, 556–568.
[CrossRef]
83. Venturi, F.; Sanmartin, C.; Taglieri, I.; Xiaoguo, Y.; Andrich, G.; Zinnai, A. The influence of packaging on
the sensorial evolution of white wine as a function of the operating conditions adopted during storage.
Agrochimica 2016, 60, 150–160.
84. Shmelev, S.E.; Powell, J.R. Ecological–economic modelling for strategic regional waste management systems.
Ecol. Econ. 2006, 59, 115–130. [CrossRef]
85. Yang, Y.-H.; Lin, S.-J.; Lewis, C. Reduction of acidification from electricity—Generating industries in Taiwan
by Life Cycle Assessment and Monte Carlo optimization. Ecol. Econ. 2009, 68, 1575–1582. [CrossRef]
86. Mouron, P.; Scholz, R.W.; Nemecek, T.; Weber, O. Life cycle management on Swiss fruit farms: Relating
environmental and income indicators for apple-growing. Ecol. Econ. 2006, 58, 561–578. [CrossRef]
87. Settanni, E.; Notarnicola, B.; Tassielli, G. Combining Life Cycle Assessment of food products with economic
tools. In Environmental Assessment and Management in the Food Industry; Woodhead Publishing Limited:
Sawston, UK, 2010; pp. 207–218, ISBN 978-1-84569-552-1.
88. Suh, S. Functions, commodities and environmental impacts in an ecological–economic model. Ecol. Econ.
2004, 48, 451–467. [CrossRef]
89. Ghertner, D.A.; Fripp, M. Trading away damage: Quantifying environmental leakage through
consumption-based, life-cycle analysis. Ecol. Econ. 2007, 63, 563–577. [CrossRef]
90. Engström, R.;Wadeskog, A.; Finnveden, G. Environmental assessment of Swedish agriculture. Ecol. Econ.
2007, 60, 550–563. [CrossRef]
91. Cantono, S.; Heijungs, R.; Kleijn, R. Environmental Accounting of Eco-innovations through Environmental
Input–Output Analysis: The Case of Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Buses. Econ. Syst. Res. 2008, 20, 303–318.
[CrossRef]
92. Hendrickson, C.T.; Lave, L.B.; Matthews, H.S. Environmental Life Cycle Assessment of Goods and
Services: An Input-Output Approach; RFF Press Resources for the Future: Washington, DC, USA, 2006;
ISBN 978-1-933115-23-8.
93. Sueyoshi, T.; Yuan, Y.; Goto, M. A literature study for DEA applied to energy and environment. Energy Econ.
2017, 62, 104–124. [CrossRef]
94. Vázquez-Rowe, I.; Iribarren, D. Review of Life-Cycle Approaches Coupled with Data Envelopment Analysis:
Launching the CFP + DEA Method for Energy Policy Making. Sci. World J. 2015, 2015, 1–10. [CrossRef]
95. Dakpo, K.H.; Jeanneaux, P.; Latruffe, L. Greenhouse gas emissions and efficiency in French sheep meat
farming: A non-parametric framework of pollution-adjusted technologies. Eur. Rev. Agric. Econ. 2017, 44,
33–65. [CrossRef]
96. Wang, B.; Brême, S.; Moon, Y.B. Hybrid modeling and simulation for complementing Lifecycle Assessment.
Comput. Ind. Eng. 2014, 69, 77–88. [CrossRef]
97. Kloepffer, W. Life cycle sustainability assessment of products: (with Comments by Helias A. Udo de Haes,
p. 95). Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 2008, 13, 89–95. [CrossRef]
98. Zamagni, A. Life cycle sustainability assessment. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 2012, 17, 373–376. [CrossRef]
99. Onozaka, Y.; Mcfadden, D.T. Does Local Labeling Complement or Compete with Other Sustainable Labels?
A Conjoint Analysis of Direct and Joint Values for Fresh Produce Claim. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 2011, 93, 693–706.
[CrossRef]
100. Sirieix, L.; Delanchy, M.; Remaud, H.; Zepeda, L.; Gurviez, P. Consumers’ perceptions of individual and
combined sustainable food labels: A UK pilot investigation: Consumers’ perceptions of sustainable food
labels. Int. J. Consum. Stud. 2013, 37, 143–151. [CrossRef]
101. Ben Youssef, A.; Abderrazak, C. Multiplicity of Eco-Labels, Competition, and the Environment. J. Agric. Food
Ind. Organ. 2009, 7. [CrossRef]
225
Sustainability 2019, 11, 71
102. Grunert, K.G.; Hieke, S.; Wills, J. Sustainability labels on food products: Consumer motivation,
understanding and use. Food Policy 2014, 44, 177–189. [CrossRef]
103. Apostolidis, C.; McLeay, F. Should we stop meating like this? Reducing meat consumption through
substitution. Food Policy 2016, 65, 74–89. [CrossRef]
104. Peano, C.; Baudino, C.; Tecco, N.; Girgenti, V. Green marketing tools for fruit growers associated groups:
Application of the Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) for strawberries and berry fruits ecobranding in northern
Italy. J. Clean. Prod. 2015, 104, 59–67. [CrossRef]
105. Alberti, M.; Caini, L.; Calabrese, A.; Rossi, D. Evaluation of the costs and benefits of an environmental
management system. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2000, 38, 4455–4466. [CrossRef]
106. Fai Pun, K. Determinants of environmentally responsible operations: A review. Int. J. Qual. Reliab. Manag.
2006, 23, 279–297. [CrossRef]
107. Van Dooren, C.; Marinussen, M.; Blonk, H.; Aiking, H.; Vellinga, P. Exploring dietary guidelines based
on ecological and nutritional values: A comparison of six dietary patterns. Food Policy 2014, 44, 36–46.
[CrossRef]
108. Heijungs, R.; Koning, A.; Suh, S.; Huppes, G. Toward an Information Tool for Integrated Product Policy:
Requirements for Data and Computation. J. Ind. Ecol. 2006, 10, 147–158. [CrossRef]
109. Weber, C.L.; Matthews, H.S. Quantifying the global and distributional aspects of American household carbon
footprint. Ecol. Econ. 2008, 66, 379–391. [CrossRef]
110. Wiedmann, T.;Wilting, H.C.; Lenzen, M.; Lutter, S.; Palm, V. Quo Vadis MRIO? Methodological, data and
institutional requirements for multi-region input–output analysis. Ecol. Econ. 2011, 70, 1937–1945. [CrossRef]
111. Molinos-Senante, M.; Hernández-Sancho, F.; Mocholí-Arce, M.; Sala-Garrido, R. Economic and
environmental performance of wastewater treatment plants: Potential reductions in greenhouse gases
emissions. Resour. Energy Econ. 2014, 38, 125–140. [CrossRef]
112. Wood, R.; Lenzen, M. Structural path decomposition. Energy Econ. 2009, 31, 335–341. [CrossRef]
113. Singh, R.K.; Murty, H.R.; Gupta, S.K.; Dikshit, A.K. An overview of sustainability assessment methodologies.
Ecol. Indic. 2012, 15, 281–299. [CrossRef]
114. Ness, B.; Urbel-Piirsalu, E.; Anderberg, S.; Olsson, L. Categorising tools for sustainability assessment. Ecol.
Econ. 2007, 60, 498–508. [CrossRef]
115. Kopp, R.; Krupnick, A.; Toman, M. Cost-benefit analysis and regulatory reform. Hum. Ecol. Risk Assess. Int. J.
1997, 3, 787–852. [CrossRef]
116. Hoogmartens, R.; Van Passel, S.; Van Acker, K.; Dubois, M. Bridging the gap between LCA, LCC and CBA as
sustainability assessment tools. Environ. Impact Assess. Rev. 2014, 48, 27–33. [CrossRef]
117. French, S. A manifesto for the new MCDA era. J. Multi-Criteria Decis. Anal. 1993, 2, 125–127. [CrossRef]
118. Bartolini, F.; Viaggi, D. Recent developments in multi-criteria evaluation of regulations: Recent developments
in multi-criteria evaluation. Qual. Assur. Saf. Crop. Foods 2010, 2, 182–196. [CrossRef]
119. De Luca, A.I.; Iofrida, N.; Leskinen, P.; Stillitano, T.; Falcone, G.; Strano, A.; Gulisano, G. Life cycle tools
combined with multi-criteria and participatory methods for agricultural sustainability: Insights from a
systematic and critical review. Sci. Total Environ. 2017, 595, 352–370. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
120. Lefebvre, M.; Espinosa, M.; Gomez y Paloma, S.; Paracchini, M.L.; Piorr, A.; Zasada, I. Agricultural landscapes
as multi-scale public good and the role of the Common Agricultural Policy. J. Environ. Plan. Manag. 2015, 58,
2088–2112. [CrossRef]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
226
sustainability
Article
Participative Processes as a Chance for Developing
Ideas to Bridge the Intention-Behavior Gap
Concerning Sustainable Diets
Leonie Fink 1,2,*, Angelika Ploeger 1 and Carola Strassner 2
1 Faculty of Organic Agricultural Sciences, Department of Organic Food Quality and Food Culture,
University Kassel, 37213 Witzenhausen, Germany; a.ploeger@uni-kassel.de
2 Department of Food Nutrition Facilities, Münster University of Applied Sciences, 48149 Münster, Germany;
strassner@fh-muenster.de
* Correspondence: l.fink@uni-kassel.de; Tel.: +49-251-8365614
Received: 30 September 2018; Accepted: 23 November 2018; Published: 27 November 2018 	

Abstract: Sustainable diets are drivers and results of sustainable food systems. Therefore, they are
crucial for improving our global diet-related problems. When trying to adopt sustainable diets,
people often struggle with the gap between their good intentions and their actual behavior. Here
we see a need for support. To understand people’s needs and what could help them, it stands to
reason that they can be directly involved in the development processes for appropriate ideas. On that
account, we conducted six workshops in different German cities from September to December 2016
with 82 participants in total. We collected data by letting participants generate ideas to bridge
the intention-behavior gap. The qualitative data was then coded in internal (168) and external
factors (989). Analyzing data shows that the higher numbers of external factors offer a wider range
of aspects that contribute to closing the intention-behavior gap from the participant’s point of view.
We discuss whether the external factors such as availability, advertising, pricing, and education about
food and nutrition may be a prerequisite for a broad mass of people to practice a more sustainable diet.
Keywords: sustainable diets; diet adoption; sustainable food system; intention-behavior gap; citizen
participation; innovation workshop
1. Introduction
Recently the consumption of sustainably produced food, e.g., organic food is increasing [1].
Practicing sustainable diets can promote diet quality and, thus, human health and has—generally
speaking—a positive impact on the environment [2]. In order to be clear on the term “sustainable
diets” we use the FAO definition, in which “Sustainable Diets are those diets with low environmental
impacts which contribute to food and nutrition security and to healthy life for present and future
generations. Sustainable diets are protective and respectful of biodiversity and ecosystems, culturally
acceptable, accessible, economically fair and affordable; nutritionally adequate, safe and healthy; while
optimizing natural and human resources.” [3].
Numerous reports on food system related issues, movements towards sustainable lifestyles and,
for example, the launch of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals are raising public
awareness for the importance of sustainable consumption and nutrition [4–9]. These cognitive contact
points give people an impulse for their own behavioral improvement [10]. However, a consistent
adoption of a sustainable diet seems difficult. To change one’s own behavior is no piece of cake.
That is why people often struggle with the implementation of their behavioral intentions [11]. This
circumstance describes the so-called intention-behavior gap, based on the inconsistency between the
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434; doi:10.3390/su10124434 227 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
behavioral intention and the actual behavior [12]. This gap is a critical aspect of behavior changes,
especially when only half of the possible intentions are translated into desired actions [11].
The Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) describes that human behavior is strongly based on
the formed intention (Figure 1). In addition, the model reveals that there are determining factors
influencing the formation of an intention. Behavioral beliefs, meaning possible positive or negative
consequences of performing the behavior, lead to a specific attitude towards the behavior in question.
Normative beliefs represent beliefs about a possible judgment of relevant persons and social pressure.
This kind of social influence leads to a specific subjective norm. Control beliefs consider possible
internal or external factors that may positively or negatively influence a person’s behavior. Furthermore,
beliefs on how easy or difficult the performance of the behavior can be, leads to a certain degree of
perceived behavioral control [13,14]. The TPB also considers other possible variables called background
factors that can influence behavioral, normative and control beliefs. Another variable is feedback loops
arising through information from previous behavior. It is assumed that the more the belief that the
behavior is under control and the more favorable the attitude and subjective norms are, the more likely
it is to form a positive intention towards a particular behavior. Formed intentions don’t always lead to
the corresponding behavior. This depends on whether a person has actual control over the behavior or
whether there are internal (information, skills, abilities, emotions, compulsions) or external factors
(opportunity, dependence on others) that are interfering. This actual behavioral control is strongly
related to the determinant of perceived behavioral control [14,15].
Figure 1. Ajzen’s model of the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) [16].
The TPB is one of the most widely used social-psychological models for researching human
behavior, especially when it comes to examining health behavior or the relation between intentions
and behavior [14,17,18]. It offers clearly defined constructs and considers internal and external
control factors that can influence the intention-behavior relation [14,18,19]; this is important to our
research context.
The imminent need for changing our dietary behavior is argued by many and sustainable dietary
consumption is one key driver for the existence of sustainable food systems [20]. At the same time,
sustainable diets are also results of sustainable food systems [21]. The question here is how to deal with
the difficulties and obstacles associated with the adoption of a sustainable diet. Recommendations
for nutritional changes coming from the scientific domain are usually perceived as weak in terms of
228
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
usability in everyday life. That is why we decided to leave the traditional research paths of nutrition
science and go towards innovation to seek solutions for overcoming the intention-behavior gap. With
solutions, we mean theoretical and practical innovations that will help us to improve and sustain
targeted nutrition behavior [22]. Research, in which responsibilities are shared and collaboration
between science and society is promoted, is urgently needed [23].
Therefore, it is clear that we need sustainable development in this area towards a higher adoption
rate of sustainable diets. Since sustainable development is an extreme challenge for society [24],
it is important that society gets involved in this process of transformation. For a truly sustainable
development that requires a change in the current state, innovative strategies are needed and new
paths have to be explored [25,26], especially when it comes to dealing with something complex like
the intention-behavior gap. In searching for a suitable approach to creating ideas for bridging the
intention-behavior gap, we decided to choose the following strategy. To understand people’s needs
and what could really support the adoption process, it stands to reason that they can be directly
involved in the idea generation process.
This paper focuses on the participative idea workshop approach for generating ideas that go along
with our research question: How can we close the intention-behavior gap when it comes to adopting
sustainable diets? Therefore, the aim is primarily to deliver results in answer to the research question,
more precisely: innovative ideas that help deal with the barriers creating the intention-behavior gap.
Since the process is open to a certain extent, we cannot commit ourselves in advance to any one type
of expected results. In our anticipated range, everything from the necessary framework conditions to
practicable approaches and behavioral strategies for everyday nutrition can be contained. Since this
research approach in context with our research question is new, it will also be examined for suitability
in the context of this research.
This paper is structured as follows. It opens with a methodological view on the development of
the research approach and workshop design. Next, we present the data gained from the workshop
series. Then we analyze the data within the discussion and finally draw conclusions.
2. Materials and Methods
To develop a suitable workshop design, a comprehensive literature research on participative
innovation processes was carried out in advance. Our findings led us to the open innovation process,
an approach commonly used in modern product development [27]. Our hypothetical conclusion
was that we can derive similar benefits [28] from applying open innovation methods as product
developers do. More specifically, we aimed for suitable ideas for bridging the intention-behavior
gap, which then led to an increased adoption rate of sustainable diets. Based on our comprehensive
research in the field of open innovation we decided that our envisaged involvement of citizens can
take place in specially arranged workshops for idea generation, based on the lead-user workshop
concept [29–31], which is part of open innovation practices. This concept inspired our research to
develop and apply a similar approach. However, we do not claim to call our approach a lead-user
workshop, because the recruitment of our participants does not fit with von Hippel’s methodology to
identify lead-users [32,33].
The aim of conducting the workshops was to develop specific ideas in answer to our research
question. We expected to receive ideas in the form of realistic, useful tips that enable people to translate
their behavioral intention into actual behavior despite emerging situational barriers. These ideas
would then serve as the basis for a kind of toolkit that could promote the adoption of sustainable diets
and, along with that, the transformation towards sustainable food systems.
To develop our workshop design, we defined the following criteria: a one-day workshop, allow
all interested citizens to participate without special requirements, a fixed participant number between
10 minimum and 20 maximum, an attractive setting as an incentive for participants, a structured
workshop led by two moderators and support of the idea generation process by using creativity
techniques. In order to gather as many ideas as possible and to achieve a small comparability of the
229
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
applied methodology, we decided to carry out a series of workshops. To capture different and regional
influences regarding existing food systems and communities we decided to choose a major city in the
west, north, east, and south of Germany. In particular, these were Dortmund, Hamburg, Berlin, and
Freiburg. These workshops were open for every interested citizen. Two additional workshops with
students from the University of Kassel with an agricultural background and students from Münster
University of Applied Sciences with a nutrition background completed the workshop series.
For the workshops, a time frame of eight hours including lunch and coffee breaks was set.
All workshops were scheduled for a Saturday from 9 am to 5 pm. We chose Saturdays because of the
higher likelihood of people having more available leisure time. According to our reasoning, we wanted
to give ideally everyone, who was interested in participating, the opportunity to do so without
checking a particular suitability in advance. We assumed that anyone who signs up for the workshop
is interested in the topic and can develop ideas suitable for dealing with the intention-behavior gap
in everyday life—at least for themselves. Because nearly everyone deals with this gap in some way,
we assumed that no specialized prior knowledge or abilities were necessary. We wanted to attract
motivated citizens to participate and not researchers or field experts with alleged solutions. One main
challenge was recruiting participants for the workshop. The basic idea was to invite as many people
as possible to the workshops in order to enable interested citizens to participate in the workshops.
The participants were recruited via general mailing lists, flyers, online event calendars, and writing to
companies, associations, and organizations with the request to forward the invitation to all possible
contacts (creating a snowball effect). Participation was voluntary and non-remunerated, so the only
direct incentive was the workshop topic and format itself. This may have led to selection bias, which
we will discuss more detailed in the limitations listed in the discussion. In addition, we had paid extra
attention to a pleasant setting and full day catering, where possible, in organic quality. The chosen
locations offered a comfortable atmosphere, enough space, modern facilities, and adequate equipment.
We decided on a structured workshop led by two facilitators. The role of the facilitators was to
introduce new work stages and lead the participants through the workshop, but not interfere with
their idea generation processes and be as neutral as possible. The basic conceptual idea for the whole
workshop was to generate as many ideas as possible by first stimulating divergent thinking and then
enabling thought condensation by convergent thinking.
The workshop procedure provided a combination of different work tasks with different creativity
techniques (Table 1). Integrating work tasks offered the possibility to bring a certain structure into the
process and to give a certain thematic input of different topic areas. Applying creativity techniques can
support the generation of innovative ideas [34,35]. We applied different creativity techniques combined
to address the research question from multiple perspectives and to maximize the potential for creative
ideas. Since there is no single working formula, we sought to address the different participants by
applying various techniques [36].
Depending on the work task, participants worked alone, together with a partner, or in groups
of three to five people (Table 2). At the end of the workshop, the idea generation processes led to
action-planning in form of developing a concept for implementing the chosen idea.
230
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
Table 1. The applied methods; Description and Purpose.
Method Description Purpose
Open space [37–40]
For the open space method, we combined two techniques: stimulus
picture technique and sentence additions. A total of 8 pairs of pictures
and 4 sentence beginnings were hung on brown paper.
In this kind of gallery walk, the participants could write down everything
they could think of when looking at the pictures and how the picture
pairs could relate to each other. The sentences should be supplemented
according to spontaneous ideas.
Pictures and sentences are closely linked to the topic of sustainable
food systems.
After the Q&A session participants are supposed to generate ideas in
answer to the research question, using the notes from the open space
activity.
This methodology allows us to capture impressions before
coming up with a thematic input. Based on this, ideas will
be generated later in the process. Here, the participants are
addressed on a visual and linguistic level.
Idea storage (brainstorming) [37,39–41]
Classic brainstorming, here, called idea storage.
After the Q&A session about the workshop’s research question,
participants are asked to generate ideas they come up with spontaneously
in order to answer the question.
Generate intuitive first ideas without using in-depth
methods.
Info poster [38–40]
In group work, participants create info posters (illustrations) on a given
topic. In the first step, participants depict the topic and all associative
aspects. In the next step, the groups walk to a poster from another group
and write down everything they can see on the info poster, what they
associate with it and what they believe it is supposed to represent. In the
final step, the poster illustrations are removed first and only the
transcriptions remain available. On this basis, after re-routing the groups,
ideas in answer to the research question are generated.
The given topics reflect different eating settings:
Nutrition during lunch break
Nutrition and rural life
Nutrition and out-of-home catering
Nutrition and city life
Nutrition on the go and during journeys
Nutrition and invitations to family or friends
The ideas to be generated can address the challenges of
implementing a sustainable diet in various settings.
Progressive abstraction [40,41]
The progressive abstraction can be used to generate thematic connections
and corresponding measures. Our modified version starts with a given
term. In relation to this, question X is answered. Referring to this result,
question Y is then answered. Then, in turn, question X related to answer
Y is answered. In this system, both questions X and Y will be addressed
three times. All three answers to question Y will be used in the next step.
Further ideas will be derived from the research question.
X: What’s good about it?
Y: How can this be achieved?
The given terms were economy, ecology, society, culture,
and accountability. These are the five dimensions of the
Best Practice Guidelines for Agriculture and Value Chains
(IFOAM Organics International). Due to this thematic
background, common sustainability dimensions
(supplemented by culture and accountability) should have
a certain impact on the idea generation.
Progressive abstraction serves to question how something
positive about an aspect can be achieved in other ways.
231
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
Table 1. Cont.
Method Description Purpose
Opposites method (negative
brainstorming) [37–41]
The opposites method is a kind of negative brainstorming. This means
that the participants are asked questions that are formulated contrary to
the actual research question.
The next step is to generate ideas in answer to the research question by
transferring the previous answers to positive solutions.
The questions bring the participants out of their previous
thinking processes by considering the complete opposite
of what they did before, e.g., how positive contributions to
the implementation of sustainable diets can be prevented:
How can we get people not to be interested in their
nutrition?
How can a worldwide unfair distribution of food be
organized?
How can we prevent a connection between regional,
sustainable agricultural production and human nutrition?
How can we discourage people from a healthy diet?
How can we reduce the consumption of sustainably
produced food?
How can we complicate the implementation of sustainable
diets?
How can people having no access to (healthy and
sustainable) food be achieved?
How can we prevent a connection between organic
farming and consumers of the produced food?
How can we convince people not to act according to their
knowledge and values regarding their diet?
Through the provocative formulation of the questions, a
certain kind of creativity should be encouraged that is
refreshing and brings variety, in the same way as trying to
be negative to get a positive outcome. Based on the results,
participants could then generate ideas for answering the
research question.
Concept development [38,40]
Based on the selected favorites of the previously generated ideas, a
further development of these should be done in group work. Each group
received two selected favorite ideas of each idea generation step. Based
thereon, concepts for idea implementation should be developed.
In this way, favored ideas should be further developed
towards an implementation concept. This also served to
give the participants something tangible at the end of the
workshop.
232
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
Table 2. The workshop design and procedure.
Time Duration
(minutes) Method Constellation Work/Ideas Are
Captured on
09:00–09:10 10 Welcome All together
09:10–09:30 20 Introduction of participants All together
09:30–09:50 20 Open Space method Individual work Brown paper
09:50–10:20 30 Input and Q&A session on
intention-behavior gap All together
10:20–10:30 10 Idea storage (brainstorming) in
answer to the research question Individual work Yellow cards (1)
10:30–10:40 10
Derive Ideas in answer to the research
question (from the Open
Space posters)
Individual work Orange cards (2)
10:40–11:00 20 Info posters, part 1 Group work,
3 participants Flip chart paper
11:00–11:10 10 Info posters, part 2 Group work,
3 participants Flip chart paper
11:10–11:25 15 Derive Ideas in answer to the research
question (from the info posters)
Group work,
3 participants Blue cards (3)
11:25–11:40 15 Coffee break
11:40–11:55 15 Progressive abstraction Partner work DIN A3
templates
11:55–12:05 10 Collect and exchange results Partner work
12:05–12:20 15
Derive Ideas in answer to the
research question (from the
progressive abstraction)
Partner work Green cards (4)
12:20–12:35 15 Selection (1, 2, 3) of favorite ideas Individual work Sticky dots
12:35–13:35 60 Lunch break
13:35–14:20 45 Topic tables Group work,
3–5 participants Brown paper
14:20–14:35 15 Opposites method
(negative brainstorming) Partner work DIN A3
templates
14:35–14:50 15
Rotation & Derive Ideas in answer
to the research question
(from opposites method)
Partner work Red cards (5)
14:50–15:05 15 Selection (4, 5) of favorite ideas Individual work Sticky dots
15:05–15:20 15 Coffee break
15:20–16:20 60 Concept development Group work,
3–5 participants Brown paper
16:20–16:50 30 Presentation, discussion round All together
16:50–17:00 10 Feedback, close the workshop All together Feedback
questionnaires
The workshops took place from September to December 2016. For the six workshops, we had
82 participants in total, of these 67 were female (81.7%) and 15 male (18.3%; Table 3). People registered
themselves by mail. In no case were more than 20 registrations reached for any workshop. Additionally,
some registered people did not attend the workshop.
233
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
Table 3. The demographic information for the workshop participants.
City Date Number of Participants
n = 82
Female
n = 67 (81.7%)
Male
n = 15 (18.3%)
Dortmund 24.09.2016 18 15 3
Kassel 22.10.2016 13 9 4
Hamburg 12.11.2016 11 10 1
Berlin 26.11.2016 10 6 4
Münster 03.12.2016 18 18 0
Freiburg 10.12.2016 12 9 3
3. Results
Before we present the data, we would like to mention that we have tried to avoid the loss of
words and meanings by translating the ideas generated from German into English for this article.
For each idea generation step, we had different colored cards, on which participants wrote down
their ideas. In this way, we collected the qualitative data during the workshop (these were always ideas
in the form of first solutions and not elaborated contributions in the form of directly implementable
solutions). Since we collected a large amount of qualitative data, we needed to organize them. For data
analysis and coding, all ideas were transferred to a simple spreadsheet software. Analyzing the data,
we decided on internal (code 1) and external (code 3) as code-categories for factors influencing the
intention-behavior relation as described in the TPB. As we screened data, we expanded these categories
by one each (internal+ (code 2) and external+ (code 4)). This additional coding was necessary because
of the vague wording of the ideas. From a factual perspective, the coder often had to think one step
further or interpret the data in order to assign it to the thematic context of the research question rather
than eliminate it.
In total, 1223 ideas were generated during the six workshops that we allocated to five codes
(see Supplementary Materials, Table S1). Overall, we can see from Table 4 that we have coded
168 internal (including 142 internal+) and 989 external (including 811 external+) factors. A total of
66 (5.4%) items of the screened data were excluded (code 0). Excluding criteria were (i) pure questions
from which no indirect idea can be read and (ii) ideas irrelevant or with no direct link to our research
question or (iii) to the subject area of sustainable diets and (iv) sustainable food systems. To illustrate
examples of data entries, we listed five ideas for each code (Table 4). It turns out that the external
factors outweigh the internal factors, which we will discuss later.
Table 4. The results of data coding, n = 1223.
Factors Factors Examples of Participants’ Ideas
Internal
n = 168,
13.7%
Internal
n = 26,
2.1%
Taking time for grocery shopping, eating, and cooking
Pack food (organic etc.) to go
Eating as a conscious time-out
Do not buy abundantly, then you can buy healthy things
Highlight the individual benefits of sustainable nutrition
Internal+
n = 142,
11.6%
Gardening yourself (for a little self-supply and a lot of insight)
Create Consciousness: What impact has my behavior on other people in the
world and in view of that we all share the world?
Question trends, do not chase after them
Accept more personal responsibility
Development of implementation strategies
234
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
Table 4. Cont.
Factors Factors Examples of Participants’ Ideas
External
n = 989,
80.9%
External
n = 178,
14.6%
Enable a need-based purchase through unpacked goods (packaging-free
shops), and in that way stem food waste (special value packs for fresh products
tempt us to by abundantly)
Celebrities as an advertising medium for sustainable nutrition (role models)
The higher tax rate for animal-based and unhealthy foods, lower for
plant-based and healthy foods
Apps for information on sustainability when purchasing
Explain sustainable diet starting in schools, through courses (cooking class etc.)
External+
n = 811,
66.3%
Community gardens (as a getting started guide)
Increase public advertising
Price tag with “real” price → conscience appeal
Organic products at every turn
More support from the government
Neither internal
nor external
(not used)
n = 66,
5.4%
Individual traffic (cars) → reduce emissions in the cities
Stupid people run, smart people wait, wise people go into the garden
Repair cafes
Start with simple things: “Who likes to shower with dead animals?”
Where is the problem in general, when people do not act
despite consciousness?
After generating the ideas, we gathered them on a pinboard, where every participant could select
two favorites for each color card set. This allowed us to identify the participant’s favorite ideas during
the workshop and the data analysis. Out of this selection, we generated a top 25 list of favorite ideas
(Table 5). Here we point out that not all ideas were available for selection in all workshops.
Table 5. The top 25 favorite ideas, rated by participants during the workshops.
Points Idea Code
11 Consume/live consciously and in a resource-saving way 2
9 Direct farm sales, without many processing steps 4
8 More packaging-free grocery stores 3
8 Clarification and education 4
7 Value and advertising-free food (valuation only on content, for example “with x% fruit
content” instead of “high content of x”) 4
7 Consumers visit farms and discuss animal husbandry, fertilization, etc. 4
7 Nutrition as a subject (cooking, gardening...) 4
7 100% utilization (of things) 4
7 More education in schools 4
6 A product database including true costs (resource consumption etc.) (for example
sausages Aldi €0.69 → Earth costs €2.69) 3
6 Food prices must represent the total cost 3
6 Ban factory farming (plus new stricter regulation of fertilizer) 4
6 Create more time resources for people 4
5 Food prices must reflect the full cost 3
5 Higher (value-added-?) tax rate for animal-based and unhealthy foods, lower for
plant-based and healthy foods 3
5 Create reward systems for sustainable nutrition 3
235
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
Table 5. Cont.
Points Idea Code
5
Create infrastructure for sustainable strategies (e.g., for neighborhood cooperation)
Legal simplifications, e.g., for (food) sharing points, shopping communities; establish
jobs that maintain the infrastructure, carry out work
3
5 Sustainability parties in the same way as “Tupperware parties” 4
5 Show an ecological footprint on the product 4
5 Responsible school catering-earning effect for children 4
5 Prohibit or strictly regulate lobbying in agriculture and the food industry 4
5 Make sustainability “noticeable”-price? 4
5 Governmental support 4
5 Organic farming as the only solution for feeding the world 4
5 Integrated production/processing in the city, e.g., urban gardening, rent a field 4
Looking at the results we notice that they are more factors that influence behavior than precise
and practicable ideas or useful suggestions to bridge the intention-behavior gap in everyday life.
During the evaluation, it became apparent that a range of topics came up repeatedly. This has led
us to an additional inductive data coding, in order to allow a more in-depth discussion of the data. We
would like to point out that some data can be assigned to several categories and some data did not
fit into the main categories at all. We prefer to use the terminology thematic cluster instead of code
categories because we have collected several similar thematic aspects under a generic term (Figure 2).
Figure 2. The thematic cluster of factors influencing the intention-behavior relation.
236
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
Availability (also meaning the supply, access, and distribution channels) of sustainably produced
food with 175 mentions is one large category within the data (example: easier availability → as
easy as buying conventional food). Others are nutrition education and education about the food
industry including sub-topics like exchange of information, provision of information, and learning
(289 mentions; example: creating general knowledge and experiences about food in schools, kitchens,
health centers, rural and urban, e.g., nutrition education as a “must”), transparency related to the
production and methods as well as to the information on the packed foods by labeling (80 mentions;
example: more transparency about the ingredients of food products and understandable declaration)
and advertising including all actions that raise public awareness for sustainable nutrition, food, and
production. This includes campaigns, positive image building, role model staging and marketing
activities (113 mentions; example: promote advertising in favor of organic food and sustainability).
It continues with the category community meaning collective action within families and societies
(111 mentions; example: introduce collective rituals for the appreciation of food by cooking together,
harvest festivals), policies such as promotion, subsidization, prohibition, sanctioning and legislation
(178 mentions; example: politically regulate lobbyism in the food industry) and agriculture meaning
aspects like food production and the role of farmers (141 mentions; example: promotion of small-scale
agriculture with greater consumer involvement). Regarding food products the following aspects
were clustered: food pricing (59 mentions; example: offer healthy food more cheaply), organic
(113 mentions; example: introduce more organic products into everyday life), local (61 mentions:
example: linking regional products and suppliers with the urban world (internet, delivery, “country”
shops)) and seasonal (21 mentions; example: supermarkets with seasonal products and a stronger
signage). Other clusters concern purchasing (22 mentions; example: avoid emotionally influenced
grocery shopping: do I really need it?), cooking (59 mentions; example: cooking, baking, canning,
preserving, stockpiling—making it more attractive and imparting craftsmanship), eating (32 mentions;
example: develop new eating habits), building awareness including consciousness, mindfulness, and
appreciation (79 mentions; example: creating awareness: what effects does my behavior have on other
people in the world? Especially considering that we all share the world), food culture (20 mentions;
example: (re)establish food culture) and time (33 mentions; example: problem: time pressure → no
sustainable nutrition possible; solution: find time and take time to eat). In addition, urban life was
often mentioned, especially urban gardening (32 mentions; example: rent a field: urban gardening in
open spaces, unused urban areas, parks, green areas) as well as the thematic aspect of food packaging
(25 mentions; example: using sleeves instead of plastic packaging for the differentiation of food)
concerning the amount and type of packaging material.
4. Discussion
As part of our research, workshops were conducted to collect ideas in answer to the research
question. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this was the first attempt of such a method being
applied to develop ideas for bridging the intention-behavior gap for adopting sustainable diets.
As described in the introduction, we expected to receive qualitative data in the form of useful ideas
that will help people to overcome emerging barriers when dealing with the gap. However, we could not
anticipate in advance what kind of ideas we will receive. Looking at the results, they do not seem to
provide direct practical or applicable solutions to the addressed problem (no ready-to-use ideas). Within
the ideas we coded as internal factors, we have a few that correspond to direct situational solutions.
Most of the data offer important information that we discuss in more detail below, starting with
the five most occurring thematic clusters: education, politics, availability, agricultural production,
and advertising.
Education is the most mentioned aspect amongst the ideas. Missing knowledge about something
can influence the actual behavioral control as an external factor. We can form an intention without
having all (necessary) knowledge about aspects concerning our target behavior, which can turn out
to be a barrier in the course of the action. This is why lifelong education about nutrition and our
237
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
food industry is still important. Education may be the one aspect where most research has been
done and the most intervention programs have been conducted so far. Many nutrition education
approaches are health-related and especially obesity-related [42–46]. Nevertheless, the efficacy of
intervention programs for nutrition is still debated [47]. As far as we know, there are no generally
applicable guidelines focusing on how to implement an effective intervention program and measures
when an intervention is really effective (for example when children help their parents to make
more sustainability-led choices). Clearly, educational institutions like schools can directly promote
sustainable development by improving the type and quality of the provided food [48,49]. However, it
should be noted that social stratification also plays a role in whether children attend school meals or not.
Therefore, there is a high probability that those who may need this education cannot be reached [50,51].
In addition, there is some knowledge about different types of emerging resistance when healthy food
proposals are implemented in schools [52].
In order to gain knowledge and education, transparency is an important factor and also often
mentioned in the data.
The data show that regulatory intervention at the political level is intentional and necessary
to have a positive impact on the development of the sustainable food system to enable sustainable
nutrition, according to the participants. This mainly concerns subsidies, controls and the labeling of
sustainable foods, as well as sanctions for unsustainable economies. This also goes along with the
other frequently mentioned aspects such as agriculture, food pricing, organic, local, and seasonal foods
and food packaging.
One further observation that seems very important is the frequently emerging aspect of food
availability (in grocery stores, restaurants, canteens, catering). Consumption behavior, including
that of sustainable nutrition, is based on a decision-making process. Here, the everyday behavior is
mainly determined by factors such as habits and convenience that are persistent in terms of possible
changes [53,54]. That is why intentions alone can be poor predictors of behavior. In order to change
everyday nutritional behavior, external factors play a more important role, especially the availability
of what is called sustainable food [53,55]. Without offering such food, people cannot opt for or against
food items at the point-of-sale. Moreover, no corresponding consumption patterns can be formed [56].
Food availability can create a direct link to people’s behavioral control because everyone can have the
intention and behavioral persuasion to practice a sustainable diet but it can be impossible to do so
because of a lack of (appropriate) food availability [53]. If availability and accessibility are drivers
of food consumption and consumers are drivers of food production [56] then we have a mutually
reinforcing, but also interdependent cycle of necessary factors where one cannot exist without the other.
Considering that one factor must exist first for this cycle to get going, it is the availability without
which there cannot be a corresponding consumption. However, there can be a pure availability of food
by agricultural production and corresponding distribution without a demand through consumption
(leaving aside economic aspects).
Agricultural food production is, of course, a hot topic considering that the availability of the
desired food quality cannot exist without prior sustainable production. The basic premise is that
there must be more sustainable agriculture and funding to produce food in the desired quality. In
addition, the (sustainable) agricultural production of food is the basis of a (sustainable) food system
and human nutrition.
Advertising seems to be a little-used aspect to promote sustainable dietary behavior. The data
contain many ideas about marketing strategies, advertising campaigns, and corresponding media
communication. The assumption is that a greater media presence of sustainable products is considered
necessary to influence the purchasing decisions positively. There are studies about buying behavior
successfully influenced by advertising—but mostly for foods that do not promote a healthy and
sustainable diet and often targeting children and adolescents [57–60].
The collective action appears to be the way to a new kind of lifestyle, where not everyone
undertakes life only individually, but many actions take place at a community level. The mentioned
238
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
actions are producing, purchasing, cooking and eating food together. Added to this is the demand
that people learn to cook and practice this frequently, whether alone or in the community. Another
aspect that seems to play a decisive role in here is “time”: to spend more time on nutrition decisions,
have more time for cooking and eating. Eating also goes hand in hand with the development of
awareness of nutrition and consciously deciding for or against food items or behavioral action. This
is where the aspect of a food culture also comes in, which should be lived out more distinctively,
according to the workshop participants. One of the biggest barriers to sustainable food consumption
is the price [61–63]. Within our data, participants suggest that prices for sustainably produced food
should be lower than those for conventional products. Another observation we make is, that the
workshop contributions also aim at a change in urban space and use. For example, establish a nutrition
parliamentary committee in the municipality; edible City: free fruit, nuts, vegetables for everyone
(allowed by the municipality); Integrated production/processing in the city, e.g., urban gardening.
One reason for the number of urban targeting ideas can be that the workshops took place in bigger
cities. Another reason for the focus may be the global challenge of urbanization in particular with
food [64–66].
The above discussion shows that all these aspects are highly connected to each other. Altogether,
aspects like education, politics, availability, and advertising serve the purpose of bringing sustainable
food into the public focus and forming a certain image. Ideally, these transformations would trigger
a real trend towards sustainable diets. Previous isolated efforts through nutrition interventions for
dietary change and public health could not bring any significant reversal from unhealthy diets [55].
It can, therefore, be assumed that real changes in the sense of improving diets require a large-scale
movement of change involving multiple sectors and actors that affect everyday life.
The data indicate what kind of external framework conditions need to be created according
to the workshop participants so that there is no gap between intention and behavior regarding the
implementation of sustainable diets. Conversely, the data can be used to read perceived aspects that
influence dietary behavior (missing availability of health-supporting and sustainably produced food,
nutrition education throughout life) or what the potential barriers are (allegedly higher prices of
health-supporting and sustainably produced food, lack of time for nutrition and related processes).
Individual aspects overlap and can also be found in the literature [53,55,56]. Consequently, we
have factors that could be key or at least suitable tools for bridging the intention-behavior gap in
decision-making situations.
According to the TPB, intentions are formed and therefore can be influenced by our attitude
towards the behavior, our subjective norms, and our perceived behavioral control. In addition,
individual, social and informational background factors can have an impact on these variables. Once
an intention is formed, the decision-making process to translate the intention into actual behavior can
be affected by the person’s actual behavioral control consisting of internal and external factors. As we
were able to code our results by internal and external factors influencing the behavior, we see how
numerous and varied these can be—especially with a complex behavior such as nutrition. Some of
the results, e.g., aspects of education, culture, and media also fit the background factors (Figure 1).
First, we may need a clearer understanding of or separation between factors influencing the actual
behavioral control and background factors. Second, using the TPB, we could also examine within
a study which background factor affects which beliefs of attitudes, subjective norms and perceived
behavioral control and thereby indirectly influence the intention and behavior [14,16]. This is a very
important aspect to consider since the TPB also includes feedback loops coming from behavior to
beliefs. Meaning, a performed behavior provides information about consequences, reactions and about
how easy or difficult it was to perform the behavior. This information can change people’s behavioral,
normative, and control beliefs, thereby influencing future intentions and behavior [14]. Combining
our results with a suitable follow-up research design may shed light on how our findings may affect
the intention-behavior relation. This, in turn, could be used to develop targeted solutions to bridge the
intention-behavior gap.
239
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
One further interesting aspect we can observe within the results is a kind of rejection of the
intention-behavior gap by the participants themselves. The results are, with a few exceptions, never
worded as self-referential. Instead, they aim for changes that others have to make, both internal and
external. There is mention of individuals who are often called consumers, farmers, politicians, and
society, also named community. When screening the data, it seems that the solutions are mainly
intended for others and for future generations, rather than for direct optimization for the participants
themselves here and now. This is why a large part of the data can be interpreted as targeting a
long-term system change that must come from the top down, which is a very interesting aspect to
come from applying a bottom-up approach. One indication of this is the high number of external
factors (80.9%). In addition, we are able to show a ranking within our dataset. It is also noticeable that
among the top 25 selected favorites (Table 5), almost all are external factors (96%). One prominent
example of a top-down action that has resulted in a broad change in behavior applies to tobacco.
A large-scale strategy that included anti-smoking campaigns, stringent product labeling and offensive
media communication of scientific evidence has led to a lifestyle change for many people [55]. If such
a multiple offensive can alter a manifested behavior (with an addictive character) such as smoking,
this example offers the potential for a similar strategy targeting nutritional behavior.
There are a number of limitations of our study which we want to list here. The first limitation
concerns the participants. The absence of a monetary incentive might have selected only people
who are who are very committed to sustainable nutrition and related issues. Their assumed high
educational status could be one reason why there are so many external factors compared to internal
factors within the results. Since we have collected almost no additional data from the participants, we
cannot say much about the socioeconomic composition of the sample. However, as stated above we
can say that most of our participants are highly educated which may affect the representation of the
intention-behavior gap. We raise this in relation to research about the relationship between intentions
and behavior affected by the socioeconomic status [67,68]. Social stratification in general also plays an
important role, e.g., food consumption is strongly affected by people’s economic and cultural resources.
Due to the lack of data, we cannot make any statements regarding our results in this respect.
In addition, our sample consists of 81.7% women (Table 3). The gender aspect can also have an
impact on health-related behavior. For example, women tend to eat more healthily than men do [69],
which in turn could imply that men and women’s intention-behavior gaps differ to a great extent.
If the proportion of men in our sample were higher, it could have an impact on the results.
Another limitation concerns the definition and interpretation of a sustainable diet. Such a complex
construct leaves room for individual interpretations. People’s ideas might differ from the scientific
definition and its intended meaning. Although we introduced the concept of a sustainable diet at the
beginning of each workshop, individual interpretations may have influenced the nature of the results.
A further limitation may be the methodology itself. Because we applied a new approach, we
see a need for a subsequent discussion on it, to possibly find out to what extent the type of results
was influenced by the applied methods and other parameters. For many people, working with
creativity techniques is a new experience and the way of their application can be perceived as abstract
and not effective. When using creativity techniques, there are four complex parameters that can be
decisive to the success or failure of the creative process. These parameters are processed (problem
perception, problem-wording, idea generation, idea evaluation, idea realization), product (what is
being worked on), environment (physical and social), and person (attitude, motivation, abilities,
personality traits) [70]. Going into detail about these parameters and their individual aspects would
go beyond the scope of this discussion. However, we can see here that many factors, some of them
uncontrollable, interact, which should be considered when planning to apply such methods. For our
research, this means that within this discussion we can take a close look at our workshop design, the
research question, and ideas to be generated, possible environmental factors and the participants.
The workshop design includes the choice of methods and their combination. Among many methods,
we chose those that we considered suitable individually and in combination. The combination of the
240
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
individual work steps could have been arranged differently. However, there is no standard procedure
for a successful workshop of this kind and for this research question. Another aspect is the lack of
discussion rounds, which could have also acted as a control for the results. In addition, the interaction
between the facilitators or organizer and the participants could have helped to correct or steer the
direction in which ideas have been developed. Another consideration is the number of group work
tasks. Here the group work and the desired creativity may be contrary. In order to achieve an optimal
participation, group dynamic abilities like autonomy, spontaneity, and communication skills have to
be learned [70]. Possibly mainly individual work in combination with subsequent discussions could
have been more conducive to expose the own ideas of all participants [38,71]. From workshop design
to the desired product, the formulation of the research question needs to be discussed. The research
question is rather generally worded. One option would be to phrase the question more specifically to
situational aspects (e.g., out-of-home catering, grocery shopping) to gain more precise direct situational
solutions. However, at the beginning of the workshop, the research question, aim, and expectations
were discussed. What remains to be mentioned is that the term ‘sustainable food systems’, was used
in the invitation and the initial explanation. This may have led the participants to generate the ideas in
their present form (targeting the whole food system). Further, the participants might not have been
able to generate self-related ideas of the kind targeted. They may possibly have a lack of appropriate
skills and experience in dealing with creativity techniques or the research question, but this is only
an assumption. The structure of the workshop was designed in such a way as to be possible for all
people to successfully participate without special prior knowledge; this worked well. First of all, we
assumed that every interested participant has experience with the intention-behavior gap and the
associated situational barriers. Thinking that anyone could contribute some ideas on how to act in
specific situations to bridge the gap was possibly a fallacy. However, we need experts in the continuous
practice of sustainable diets. These experts must be found and recruited or at least selected more
specifically. Our participants had a variety of backgrounds and we had no further information about
their skills and abilities for dealing with the methods and the research question. If we return to the
lead-user approach, it is about people who already have solutions. Therefore, it should be considered
that a more specific selection of participants and training could be a possible success factor. Within our
research, we dealt with a lack of capacities to implement this approach. In addition to the participants,
of course, the facilitators also play a major role in a workshop. The facilitators were neutral during the
creative process and did not judge the ideas. It seems important to reconsider if a stronger steering
would be more effective to release more potential innovative ideas. In a similar way, a lead-user
workshop has stakeholders join the workshop and always give clear instructions about what they
have in mind. In such cases, the success of the company may very well depend on the developed
product. In order to make our applied method more resilient and to find out exactly which aspects
have significantly influenced the processes of idea generation, a follow-up study with all participants
would be necessary. Though we have not carried this out at this time, what we already have is an
evaluated feedback questionnaire distributed to all participants at the end of each workshop. In order
to ask for the participant’s personal attitude towards the workshop design and other specific aspects,
we used a 5-point Likert scale (Table 6).
241
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
Table 6. The results of the feedback questionnaire, n = 63.
Selected Questions
Strongly Agree
Agree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
Neither Agree nor Disagree
No Information
The methods used were suitable and appropriate for the workshop. 50 12 - 1 - -
The methods used were suitable to support creativity. 45 15 1 1 1 -
The research question is suitable for processing within an idea workshop. 47 14 1 - 1 -
The aim of the workshop was clear after the presentation of the question. 27 33 2 1 - -
The implementation of several regional workshops makes sense for the
research question. 45 15 - - 1 2
The work materials provided (pens, paper, etc.) were sufficient. 61 2 - - - -
The amount of time was appropriate for the workshop. 45 14 2 - 1 1
The venue was appropriate for the workshop. 58 4 1 - - -
The atmosphere during the workshop was pleasant. 58 5 - - - -
Any interested citizen can participate in this workshop without special
prior knowledge. 31 24 6 - 1 1
Including citizens in such scientific research makes sense. 50 13 - - - -
By involving citizens in the development of ideas to bridge the
intention-behavior gap, ideas can be successful later. 40 18 3 - - -
Overall, the facilitators were competent. 56 6 - - - 1
The facilitators were clear in the speeches and work tasks. 42 20 - - - 1
The facilitators reacted sufficiently to questions. 57 5 - - 1 -
The facilitators remained neutral within the facilitation. 54 8 1 - - -
The facilitators guided the participants well through the workshop. 59 3 - - - 1
In total, 63 (76.8%) participants of a total of 82 completed the questionnaire. Since the workshops’
procedure was identical, we decided on an overall evaluation without distinguishing between the
individual workshops. The discussion of the results below only refers to the participants who
completed the questionnaire. It is not possible to make informed statements about the attitudes
of the other participants. That is why, despite the generally positive feedback results, we cannot
assume that all participants share these opinions. We can see that in total, 62 participants agreed that
the applied methods were suitable for the workshop and 60 participants think that the methods were
suitable for supporting creativity. In general, we can say that for 61 participants the research question
was perceived as suitable for processing within an idea workshop. Additionally, the workshop’s aim
was clear for the participants (60 participants agreed). Addressing environmental parameters, we can
see that in general participants agreed on appropriate time management (59 participants), appropriate
venue (62 participants), and pleasant atmosphere (63 participants).
Regarding the question, whether it makes sense to involve citizens in such research, all 63 agreed.
However, 6 participants disagreed on the statement that any interested citizen can participate in
this workshop without special prior knowledge (whereas 55 agreed on that). Another important
242
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
point is that 58 participants thought that involving citizens in the development of ideas to bridge the
intention-behavior gap can be successful for their later application.
Finally, we cannot say exactly why the results are influencing factors rather than situational
solutions and if a different methodological approach would have generated other results that
more innovatively address situational barriers, or whether the external factors such as availability,
advertising, pricing, and education about food and nutrition are simply a prerequisite for a broad
mass of people to practice a sustainable diet. While not a new point, this does seem to reinforce
its importance.
5. Conclusions
Sustainable diets cannot exist without sustainable food systems and vice versa. Sustainable food
systems wherein environments provide only sustainable food choices evolve slowly, if at all. That is
why it is important to support society by researching the adoption and practice of sustainable diets.
The diversity of the gained data and their possible interpretations alone show that our research
is part of a highly charged discussion where we are easily crossing set research boundaries. Since
the results in themselves are not entirely new ideas, research into innovations that make a decisive
contribution needs to continue. All the listed limitations within the discussion could lead us to say that
our gained results are rather a list of desiderata of a selected group of people who would like to be able
to practice a more sustainable dietary behavior. We have to accept this on the basis of the mentioned
limitations, and also because of the sample size and geographical limitation (Germany). However, the
interesting aspect of the results is that those participants themselves reject the intention-behavior gap
(as we discussed earlier). We see this as an important research topic that deserves further investigation.
Our research did not solve the problem at its first attempt and it seems that we are just at the
beginning of the problem-solving process. To achieve our planned goal to research solutions to
overcome barriers and bridge the intention-behavior gap we are planning to adjust our methodological
approach and our sample, as discussed. It is necessary to collect more socioeconomic data about the
participants so that we can later analyze and interpret results in differentiated ways. Ideally, studies will
be conducted with particular selected groups of people such as men, woman, mothers, the privileged,
the deprived, and experts. It is conceivable to carry out a study that examines the intention-behavior
gap of the participants (researching their behavior in vivo). The design should strongly be based
on Ajzen’s TPB, his published research, and supporting guides on TPB-based questionnaires and
interventions [72]. On the other hand, the study design should involve the participants in the solution
process. Therefore, we need to develop a methodological approach that leads people to work on
ready-to-use ideas for bridging the intention-behavior gap.
We encourage other scientists to apply further methodological approaches that promote
participative processes and collaborate with society because studies are required to deliver applicable
solutions to people’s everyday life. On the basis of our work, we further suggest that future research
can use a mixed methodology approach. This allows researchers to collect and distinguish quantitative
and qualitative data from participants with different intention-behavior gaps. Consequently, the factors
that cause these differences could be more closely analyzed and understood, which in turn could lead
to applicable solutions. It remains to be said that, as with many other studies there is no innovation
without a risk [73].
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at http://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/10/12/4434/
s1, Table S1: Complete dataset (Excel chart).
Author Contributions: L.F. developed the workshops design, conducted the workshop series, organized and
analyzed the data and wrote the paper. A.P. contributed to the planning of workshops and has significantly
revised the paper. C.S. contributed to the theoretical approach of the workshops, significantly revised the paper
and did the final language editing. All authors interpreted the results and approved the final version of the paper.
Funding: The workshops were funded by the Department of Organic Food Quality and Food Culture at the
University of Kassel, Germany. The costs of this open access publication were covered by the Open-Access-
243
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
Publications fund from the University of Kassel which is financed by the German Research Foundation (DFG)
and the Library of University of Kassel.
Acknowledgments: We express our thanks to all participants who dedicated their time.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Willer, H.; Lernoud, J. The World of Organic Agriculture 2018. Statistics and Emerging Trends.; Willer, H.,
Lernoud, J., Eds.; Research Institute of Organic Agriculture (FiBL), Frick, and IFOAM–Organics International:
Bonn, Germany, 2018; ISBN 9783940946126.
2. Johnston, J.L.; Fanzo, J.C.; Bogil, B. Understanding Sustainable Diets: A Descriptive Analysis of the
Determinants and Processes That Influence Diets and Their Impact on Health, Food Security and Environmental
Sustainability. Adv. Nutr 2014, 5, 418–429. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. FAO. Sustainable Diets and Biodiversity Directions and Solutions for Policy, Research and Action; Burlingame, B.,
Dernini, S., Eds.; FAO: Rome, Italy, 2012; ISBN 9789251072882.
4. Runini, L.F.; Ciati, R.; Pratesi, C.A.; Marino, M.; Principato, L.; Vannuzzi, E.Working toward healthy and
sustainable diets: the “Double Pyramid Model” developed by the Barilla Center for Food and Nutrition
to raise awareness about the environmental and nutritional impact of foods. Front. Nutr. 2015, 2, 1–6.
[CrossRef]
5. Seyfang, G. Shopping for sustainability: Can sustainable consumption promote ecological citizenship?
Env. Polit. 2005, 14, 290–306. [CrossRef]
6. Sachs, J.D. From millennium development goals to sustainable development goals. Lancet 2012. [CrossRef]
7. OECD. Promoting Sustainable Consumption. Good Practices in OECD Countries; OECD Publications: Paris,
France, 2008.
8. Clark, G. Evolution of the global sustainable consumption and production policy and the United Nations
Environment Programme’s (UNEP) supporting activities. J. Clean. Prod. 2007, 15, 492–498. [CrossRef]
9. Toledo, Á.; Burlingame, B. Biodiversity and nutrition: A common path toward global food security and
sustainable development. J. Food Compos. Anal. 2006, 19, 477–483. [CrossRef]
10. Young, W.; Hwang, K.; McDonald, S.; Oates, C.J. Sustainable consumption: Green consumer behaviour
when purchasing products. Sustain. Dev. 2010, 18, 20–31. [CrossRef]
11. Sheeran, P.; Webb, T.L. The Intention–Behavior Gap. Soc. Personal. Psychol. Compass 2016, 10, 503–518.
[CrossRef]
12. Orbell, S.; Sheeran, P. “Inclined abstainers”: A problem for predicting health-related behaviour. Br. J.
Soc. Psychol. 1998, 37, 151–165. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Ajzen, I. From Intentions to Actions: A Theory of Planned Behavior. In Action Control. From Cognition to Behavior;
Kuhl, J., Beckmann, J., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1985; pp. 11–39. ISBN 978-3-642-69746-3.
14. Ajzen, I. Consumer attitudes and behavior: The theory of planned behavior applied to food consumption
decisions. Rivivista Econ. Agrar. 2015, 2, 121–138. [CrossRef]
15. Ajzen, I. Attitudes, Personality And Behaviour, 2nd ed.; Open University Press: Berkshire, UK, 2005;
ISBN 978-0335217038.
16. Ajzen, I.; Albarracin, D.; Hornik, R. Prediction and Change of Health Behavior: Applying the Reasoned Action Approach;
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates: New Jersey, NJ, USA, 2007; ISBN 0-8058-5926-8.
17. Knoll, N.; Scholz, U.; Rieckmann, N. Einführung Gesundheitspsychologie, 4th ed.; Ernst Reinhardt Verlag:
München, Germany, 2017; ISBN 978-3825247454.
18. Skår, S.; Sniehotta, F.F.; Araújo-Soares, V.; Molloy, G.J. Prediction of behaviour vs. prediction of behaviour
change: The role of motivational moderators in the theory of planned behaviour. Appl. Psychol. 2008, 57,
609–627. [CrossRef]
19. Armitage, C.J.; Conner, M. Efficacy of the Theory of Planned Behaviour: A meta-analytic review. Br. J.
Soc. Psychol. 2001, 40, 471–499. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Mason, P.; Lang, T. Sustainable diets: How ecological nutrition can transform consumption and the food system;
Routledge: New York, NY, USA, 2017; ISBN 978-0415744720.
21. Meybeck, A.; Gitz, V. Conference on “Sustainable food consumption” Sustainable diets within sustainable
food systems. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 2017, 76, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
244
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
22. Rothman, A.J. “Is there nothing more practical than a good theory?”: Why innovations and advances in
health behavior change will arise if interventions are used to test and refine theory. Int. J. Behav. Nutr.
Phys. Act. 2004, 1, 1–7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Coudel, E.; Devautour, H.; Soulard, C.; Faure, G.; Hubert, B. Renewing Innovation Systems in Agriculture and
Food: How to Go towards More Sustainability?Wageningen Academic Publishers: Wageningen, The Netherlands,
2013; ISBN 9789086862146.
24. United Nations. Our Common Future: Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development; Oxford
University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1987; ISBN 978-0192820808.
25. Lowe, P.; Phillipson, J.; Lee, R.P. Socio-technical innovation for sustainable food chains: roles for social
science. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2008, 19, 226–233. [CrossRef]
26. Ericksen, P.J.; Ingram, J.S.I.; Liverman, D.M. Food security and global environmental change: Emerging
challenges. Environ. Sci. Policy 2009, 12, 373–377. [CrossRef]
27. Chesbrough, H.W. Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting from Technology; Harvard
Business School Publishing: Boston, MA, USA, 2003; ISBN 1578518377.
28. Tidd, J.; Bessant, J. Strategic innovation management; John Wiley & Sons Inc.: New York, NY, USA, 2014;
ISBN 978-1-118-45723-8.
29. Reichwald, R.; Piller, F. Interaktive Wertschöpfung: Open Innovation, Individualisierung und neue Formen der
Arbeitsteilung; Gabler Verlag: Wiesbaden, Germany, 2009; ISBN 978-3-8349-9440-0.
30. Busse, M.; Siebert, R. The role of consumers in food innovation processes. Eur. J. Innov. Manag. 2018, 21,
20–43. [CrossRef]
31. von Hippel, E. Democratizing innovation: The evolving phenomenon of user innovation. J. für Betriebswirtschaft
2005, 55, 63–78. [CrossRef]
32. Von Hippel, E. Lead Users: A Source of Novel Product Concepts. Manage. Sci. 1986, 32, 773–907. [CrossRef]
33. Lüthje, C.; Herstatt, C. The Lead User method: An outline of empirical findings and issues for future research.
R&D Manag. 2004, 34, 553–568. [CrossRef]
34. Cook, P. The creativity advantage—Is your organization the leader of the pack? Ind. Commer. Train. 1998, 30,
179–184. [CrossRef]
35. Meinel, M.; Voigt, K.-I. The Application and Impact of Creativity Techniques in Innovation Management.
In Proceedings of the XXVII ISPIM Innovation Conference—Blending Tomorrow’s Innovation Vintage, Porto,
Portugal, 19–22 June 2016.
36. Backerra, H.; Malorny, C.; Schwarz,W. Kreativitätstechniken. Kreative Prozesse anstoßen, Innovationen fördern,
3rd ed.; Carl Hanser Verlag: Munich, Germany, 2007; ISBN 978-3446412330.
37. Wack, O.G.; Detlinger, G.; Grothoff, H. Kreativ sein kann jeder: Kreativitätstechniken für Leiter von Projektgruppen,
Arbeitsteams, Workshops und von Seminaren. Ein Handbuch zum Problemlösen, 2nd ed.; Windmühle Verlag:
Hamburg, Germany, 1998; ISBN 978-3922789420.
38. Higgins, J.M.; Wiese, G.G. Innovationsmanagement. Kreativitätstechniken für den unternehmerischen Erfolg;
Springer: Berlin, Germany, 1996; ISBN 978-3540605720.
39. Gray, D.; Brown, S.; Macanufo, J. Gamestorming. Ein Praxisbuch für Querdenker, Moderatoren und Innovatoren;
O’Reilly Media Inc.: Köln, Germany, 2011; ISBN 978-3897213265.
40. van Aerssen, B.; Buchholz, C. Das große Handbuch Innovation. 555 Methoden und Instrumente für mehr Kreativität
und Innovation im Unternehmen; Verlag Franz Vahlen: München, Germany, 2018; ISBN 978-3800656837.
41. Boos, E. Das große Buch der Kreativitätstechniken; Compact Verlag GmbH: München, Germany, 2010;
ISBN 978-3817451067.
42. Murimi, M.W.; Kanyi, M.; Mupfudze, T.; Amin, M.R.; Mbogori, T.; Aldubayan, K. Factors Influencing
Efficacy of Nutrition Education Interventions: A Systematic Review. J. Nutr. Educ. Behav. 2017, 49, 142–165.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. USDA. A Series of Systematic Reviews on the Effects of Nutrition Education on Children’s and Adolescents’ Dietary
Intake; U.S. Department of Agriculture: Richmond, VA, USA, 2012.
44. Ajie,W.N.; Chapman-Novakofski, K.M. Impact of computer-mediated, obesity-related nutrition education
interventions for adolescents: A systematic review. J. Adolesc. Heal. 2014, 54, 631–645. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Contento, I.R. Nutrition education: Linking research, theory, and practice. Asia Pac. J. Clin. Nutr. 2008, 17,
176–179. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
245
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
46. Silveira, J.A.C.; Taddei, J.A.A.C.; Guerra, P.H.; Nobre, M.R.C. Effectiveness of school-based nutrition
education interventions to prevent and reduce excessive weight gain in children and adolescents:
A systematic review. J. Pediatr. (Rio. J). 2011, 87, 382–392. [CrossRef]
47. Benn, J.; Carlsson, M. Learning through school meals? Appetite 2014, 78, 23–31. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Morgan, K.; Sonnino, R. The School Food Revolution: Public Food and the Challenge of Sustainable Development;
Earthscan: London, UK, 2008; ISBN 9781844074822.
49. Sonnino, R. Quality food, public procurement, and sustainable development: The school meal revolution in
Rome. Environ. Plan. 2009, 41, 425–441. [CrossRef]
50. Oncini, F.; Guetto, R. Determinants of dietary compliance among Italian children: Disentangling the effect of
social origins using Bourdieu’s cultural capital theory. Sociol. Heal. Illn. 2017, 39, 47–62. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51. Wills,W.J.; Danesi, G.; Kapetanaki, A.B.; Hamilton, L.K. The Socio-Economic Boundaries Shaping Young
People’s Lunchtime Food Practices on a School Day. Child. Soc. 2018, 32, 195–206. [CrossRef]
52. Fletcher, A.; Jamal, F.; Fitzgerald-Yau, N.; Bonell, C. ‘We’ve Got Some Underground Business Selling Junk
Food’: Qualitative Evidence of the Unintended Effects of English School Food Policies. Sociology 2014, 48,
500–517. [CrossRef]
53. Vermeir, I.; Verbeke, W. Sustainable Food Consumption: Exploring the Consumer “Attitude-Behavioral
Intention” Gap. J. Agric. Environ. Ethics 2006, 19, 169–194. [CrossRef]
54. Pfeiffer, C.; Speck, M.; Strassner, C. What leads to lunch—How social practices impact (non-)sustainable
food consumption/eating habits. Sustainability 2017, 9, 1437. [CrossRef]
55. Duchin, F. Sustainable consumption of food: A framework for analyzing scenarios about changes in diets.
J. Ind. Ecol. 2005, 9, 99–114. [CrossRef]
56. Kearney, J. Food consumption trends and drivers. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2010, 365, 2793–2807.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
57. Matthews, A.E. Children and obesity: A pan-European project examining the role of food marketing. Eur. J.
Public Health 2008, 18, 7–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Story, M.; French, S. Food Advertising and Marketing Directed at Children and Adolescents in the US. Int. J.
Behav. Nutr. Phys. Act. 2004, 17, 1–17. [CrossRef]
59. Chandon, P.; Wansink, B. Does food marketing need to make us fat? A review and solutions. Nutr. Rev. 2012,
70, 571–593. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. Kelly, B.; Hattersley, L.; King, L.; Flood, V. Persuasive food marketing to children: Use of cartoons and
competitions in Australian commercial television advertisements. Health Promot. Int. 2008, 23, 337–344.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
61. Grunert, K.G. Sustainability in the Food Sector: A Consumer Behaviour Perspective. Int. J. Food Syst. Dyn.
2011, 2, 207–218. [CrossRef]
62. Barosh, L.; Friel, S.; Engelhardt, K.; Chan, L. The cost of a healthy and sustainable diet - Who can afford it?
Aust. N. Z. J. Public Health 2014, 38, 7–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Furst, T.; Connors, M.; Bisogni, C.A.; Sobal, J.; Falk, L.W. Food choice: A conceptual model of the process.
Appetite 1996, 26, 247–265. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Satterthwaite, D.; McGranahan, G.; Tacoli, C. Urbanization and its implications for food and farming.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2010, 365, 2809–2820. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Global Panel. Urban Diets and Nutrition: Trends, Challenges and Opportunities for Policy Action; Policy Brief
No.9; Global Panel on Agriculture and Food Systems for Nutrition: London, UK, 2017.
66. Regmi, A.; Dyck, J. Effects of Urbanization on Global Food Demand. Changing Structure of Global Food
Consumption and Trade. 2001. Available online: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.
1.738.5776&rep=rep1&type=pdf (accessed on 12 August 2018).
67. Conner, M.; Mceachan, R. Moderating Effect of Socioeconomic Status on the Relationship between Health
Cognitions and Behaviors. Ann. Behav. Med. 2013, 46, 19–30. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. Vasiljevic, M.; Ng, Y.L.; Griffin, S.J.; Sutton, S.; Marteau, T.M. Is the intention-behaviour gap greater amongst
the more deprived? A meta-analysis of five studies on physical activity, diet, and medication adherence in
smoking cessation. Br. J. Health Psychol. 2016, 21, 11–30. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69. Oncini, F.; Guetto, R. Cultural capital and gender differences in health behaviours: A study on eating,
smoking and drinking patterns. Health Soc. Rev. 2017, 27, 15–30. [CrossRef]
246
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4434
70. Sikora, J. Handbuch der Kreativ-Methoden, 2nd ed.; Katholisch Soziales Institut der Erzdiözese Köln: Cologne,
Germany, 2001; ISBN 978-3927566255.
71. Prekel, T.; Sobey, L.-M. Excursions and Metaphors—Getting crazy ideas, and turning them into brilliantsolutions.
In Complex Creativity, The Pathway to Opportunity Finding; Rajah, K., Ed.; Greenwich University Press: London,
UK, 2007; ISBN 978-1861662323.
72. Ajzen, I. Theory of Planned Behavior. Available online: http://people.umass.edu/aizen/tpb.html (accessed
on 9 November 2018).
73. Heye, D. Creativity and innovation: Two key characteristics of the successful 21st century information
professional. Bus. Inf. Rev. 2006, 23, 252–257. [CrossRef]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
247
sustainability
Article
Participatory Guarantee Systems in Spain:
Motivations, Achievements, Challenges and
Opportunities for Improvement Based on Three
Case Studies
Marta López Cifuentes 1, Christian Reinhard Vogl 1,* and Mamen Cuéllar Padilla 2
1 Department of Sustainable Agricultural Systems, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences Vienna,
1180 Vienna, Austria; m.lopezcifuentes@boku.ac.at
2 Department of Social Sciences and Humanities, University of Córdoba, Plaza del Cardenal Salazar,
14080 Córdoba, Spain; mcuellar@uco.es
* Correspondence: christian.vogl@boku.ac.at; Tel.: +43-1-47654-93312
Received: 18 September 2018; Accepted: 31 October 2018; Published: 7 November 2018
	

Abstract: The increasing number of producers and consumers of organic products means that there
is an increasing need to guarantee the organic characteristics of organic products. Certification is
a tool that bridges the information deficit between demand and supply, ensuring that a product
complies with the specified standards. Third-party certification (TPC) is the main tool for assessing
compliance today. However, there have been criticisms about the suitability of TPC for small-scale
producers and alternative certification systems have been developed, such as Participatory Guarantee
Systems (PGS). PGS are quality assurance systems in which stakeholders are expected to be involved
and assure the quality claims being made by producers. This paper presents three PGS initiatives
in Spain. The research methods used in this study were semi-structured and structured interviews.
Interviewees felt that their PGS initiatives fulfilled the important motivations of building a community
and adding value to their products. The main challenges mentioned were the participation of
stakeholders and the efficiency of internal organization. The absence of official recognition for PGS
in Spain and insufficient dissemination were also perceived as challenges. Although PGS has the
potential for further development in Spain, the interviewees believed that more support and official
recognition were still required.
Keywords: certification; organic agriculture; Participatory Guarantee Systems; Spain; alternative
certification systems
1. Introduction
In Europe in recent decades, organic agriculture has evolved alongside the regulations that are
applicable to it, as well as support programs and subsidies available to the organic sector [1]. Based on
these regulations, a control and certification system for organic production is in place in Europe and in
an equivalent way for organic imports to Europe as well. Third-party certification (TPC) is currently
the main assessment system used to ensure the conformity or compliance of organic agriculture (and its
products) with the regulatory framework.
Although required by law and recognized in the literature and in practice for its benefits, there has
also been criticism of TPC [2–10]. Participatory Guarantee Systems (PGS) appeared as an alternative to
TPC. PGS are expected to provide an organic guarantee, based on the participation of producers and
other stakeholders, and are built on participation, trust, social networks and knowledge exchange.
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081; doi:10.3390/su10114081 248 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
Besides frequent claims made about the possible benefits of PGS, with a few exceptions, the
debate on PGS lacks empirical data about their actual performance, benefits and challenges worldwide,
including in Spain. The objective of this article is to provide information about three Spanish
PGS initiatives in the regions of Valencia, Murcia and Granada in order to identify their members’
motivations as well as their achievements, challenges and opportunities for improvement. This paper
may serve as an empirical contribution to the global debate on the performance of PGS and the
opportunities they present.
1.1. Organic Certification in Europe
In the 1930s and 1940s, farmers and farmers’ groups developed the first organic agriculture
associations in most industrial countries in response to the industrialization and intensification of
agriculture [11,12]. However, it was not until the 1970s that associations of organic farmers started
organizing themselves in order to develop their own private organic standards. At the end of the 1980s
these associations lost their regulatory importance in certifying their members as governments started
regulating organic agriculture themselves [12]. Certification was viewed as a necessity in a growing
market to improve the efficiency of the market by creating a “common language” [13].
The first common organic standards in the EU were laid down in 1991 with the aim of protecting
organic agriculture and consumers by ensuring fair competition between producers and transparency
in the production system. This regulation established the basic guidelines for production, labeling
and control [14]. Organic agriculture in the EU is currently regulated by Council Regulation (EC) No.
834/2007, Commission Regulations (EC) No. 889/2008 and No. 1235/2008 [15] and their respective
amendments. Inspection and certification in the organic sector are performed by private or public
certification bodies in order to ensure that the actors along the organic supply chain follow the European
organic agriculture regulations [16]. Certification is a process through which written assurance confirms
that a product, process or service conforms to specified requirements [17]. This quality sign depends
then on the credibility of the institutions awarding them. And to be credible, quality signs should
be given by an external body with no interest in the sales of the products [18]. In the case of organic
agriculture, certification is used to guarantee marketing claims for organic quality attributes [4]. TPC is
now the main assessment system [13]. According to Deaton (2004) [19], (p. 615) third-party certifiers
are “external institutions that assess, evaluate and certify quality claims”. TPC bodies are independent
and therefore are perceived as objective and transparent [2,13,19]. Furthermore, TPC bodies have
to prove their competence, including their capability to carry out inspections, through accreditation
based on ISO/IEC 17065:2012 [15].
The importance of TPC is increasing in international quality food markets due to consumers’
need for clear and reliable indications of food quality and safety (Anders et al., 2010). Certification of
compliance with specific standards has the potential to communicate product claims beyond national
boundaries and improve access to markets [20]. TPC reduces the risk of fraud and thus increases
confidence in regulatory compliance [2]. It also appears to help producers implement sustainable
improvements efficiently in their production practices and legitimizes organic agriculture in the eyes
of European consumers [21,22]. Furthermore, TPC’s compliance with established EU standards gives
producers access to the organic market and economic support or subsidies from member states [23].
Nevertheless, TPC has been criticized for being expensive for producers, which results in
consumers paying more for their products, for not being adapted to local circumstances, being hard for
small producers to achieve, making agriculture more bureaucratic, simplifying production processes,
and for not always being clear about the procedures the TPC bodies are implementing [2–5,7,9].
In addition, TPC does not distinguish between different kinds of organic producers. Thus, small and
large producers have to fulfil the same standards in order to certify their products under TPC [10].
In the debate on TPC, it has also been claimed that it is important to develop organic agriculture
and its standards in a respectful and coherent way adapted to traditional ecosystems, linked to
cultural diversity and including farmers’ technological knowledge, aiming at participation, respect
249
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
and democracy [8,12]. In this context, alternative certification systems that allow producers to create
their own locally-based definition of organic agriculture have been developed [23]. Smallholders in
the Global South, for example, have developed producer groups with internal control systems or
Participatory Guarantee Systems (PGS) [14]. PGS are thought to have first appeared in the 1970s,
when groups of organic farmers started certifying themselves using first-party certification, and have
reappeared recently in the 21st century as an alternative system following criticisms of TPC [24].
1.2. Participatory Guarantee Systems
The term Participatory Guarantee System was first used on a global level in 2004. PGS initiatives
were presented and analyzed during a workshop run by the Latin American Organic Agriculture
Movement (MAELA), International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM) and
the Centro Ecológico in Torres, Rio Grande do Sul (Brazil) [25]. PGS were defined as “quality
assurance initiatives that are locally relevant, emphasize the participation of stakeholders, including
producers and consumers, and operate outside the frame of TPC”. The basic elements of PGS,
according to IFOAM, are participation, a shared vision, transparency, trust, being a learning process,
and horizontality [26].
PGS are expected to be culturally appropriate, require less paperwork than TPC, and are linked
to local and alternative commercialization channels (Alternative commercialization channels are
considered to be those based on the reconnection and close communication between producer and
consumer, building new forms of relationships and governance of the network of actors [27]) [8,26,27].
PGS appear to help producers improve production, achieve political independence, boost livelihoods
and establish social networks, and are thought to be appropriate for small producers due to their
participatory and horizontal structure allowing a more suitable and less costly system of certification [8].
A PGS initiative should reflect a community’s capacity to prove trust through the implementation
of diverse social and cultural control instruments in order to provide information to guarantee the
integrity of their organic producers [25].
However, PGS are not exempt from mistrust. There is potential for dishonesty, which might raise
some doubt concerning PGS [23]. The possible opportunistic behavior and the commitment of members
are two of the most common challenges faced by PGS initiatives [28]. The participation of members,
especially consumers, is a barrier being faced by PGS initiatives in various countries [23,25,29,30].
This dependence on voluntary work seems to be a significant obstacle to the development of PGS [31].
Despite the obstacles being faced by PGS, there are PGS initiatives operating in Latin America,
USA, India, New Zealand, South and East Africa and Europe [26,32]. Even though local conditions
and cultural contexts differ, all PGS initiatives appear to share the abovementioned basic elements and
principles and also to be similarly organized [33]. In countries such as Brazil and Mexico, PGS work in
parallel with organic legislation and TPC [23,34,35], whereas in EU member states producers without
TPC are not allowed to sell their products as organic or receive subsidies from organic funds [29],
with the exception of Sweden, where the government gives economic support to non-certified organic
producers [36]. According to Padel (2010) [14] (p. 70) there are no objective reasons why PGS should be
limited to smallholder producers in the Global South. PGS initiatives also have the potential to support
organic production based on agroecological ideas and to create fair markets in EU countries [30].
1.3. Participatory Guarantee Systems in the Context of Spain
The first pioneers of organic agriculture in Spain appeared in the 1950s. Nonetheless, it was not
until the 1980s that farmers established the first producers’ organizations for organic agriculture in
the country. In 1988, the name “Organic Agriculture” became official in Spain through Royal Decree
759/1988 and the Regulatory Council of Organic Agriculture (Consejo Regulador de la Agricultura
Ecológica, CRAE) was established [6]. Since then, there has been continuous development in this
sector, both in terms of the number of producers and area of cultivated land. The area dedicated to
organic agriculture in Spain has increased considerably in recent decades, from 4235 ha in 1991 to
250
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
1,610,130 ha in 2015 [37]. Nevertheless, the domestic organic market in Spain has not developed in line
with its existing productive potential. Around half of the national organic production is destined for
export [38].
Cuéllar Padilla (2008) [6] argues that TPC in Spanish organic agriculture could result in the loss of
associations and networks that were around at the start of the organic movement in Spain. Moreover,
TPC seems to be losing its connection with local conditions in Spain and not taking the socio-political
aspects of agriculture into account [23,39]. As a result, there has been a concentration of farms in this
sector: in Spain larger farms are certified with TPC, while small and medium-sized farms (farms with
less than 10 ha) have been ignored [40,41].
Given the lack of empirical data on PGS, this article attempts to answer the following
research questions:
• What are the internal challenges and benefits identified by members of these three PGS initiatives?
• What are the motivations and underlying beliefs about PGS held by stakeholders in these three
PGS initiatives?
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. The PGS Initiatives Studied
The PGS initiatives studied are located in the Spanish regions of Valencia (PGS Ecollaures), Murcia
(PGS Vecinos Campesinos) and the Valley of Lecrín, Granada (PGS Ecovalle) (Figure 1). They were
chosen for their proximity and different characteristics. Based on the authors’ own empirical data,
they can be characterized as follows:
Figure 1. Map of Spain with its different autonomous communities (grey dotted lines). Drops:
well-established Participatory Guarantee Systems (PGS) initiatives in Spain in the year of
research (2016); in green: the three PGS initiatives studied: Ecollaures, Vecinos Campesinos and
Ecovalle (own creation, Paint, Microsoft Office package, 2010).
Ecollaures was founded by producers in 2010 with the assistance of a student at the University
of Valencia (first for his Master’s thesis and then for his PhD thesis) to help producers connect with
consumers and subsequently improve their participation and communication skills during meetings.
Vecinos Campesinos was founded in 2011 by producers from the region of Murcia who were
not interested in TPC and decided to create a PGS initiative. After some meetings and based on a
251
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
Master’s thesis and the example of Ecovalle’s internal regulation, these producers created the PGS
Vecinos Campesinos with the involvement of a consumers’ association.
Ecovalle started in 2008 by a group of producers in this rural environment who shared an interest
in organic and family agriculture. These producers ran workshops, specialist training courses and
other activities related to organic agriculture [42,43]. In 2010 they started working on the development
of their PGS initiative with the help of a PhD student from the University of Córdoba. Ecovalle is both
a production cooperative and a PGS initiative. In 2016 Ecovalle merged with the “vergel de la vega”
cooperative. Following the merger, the cooperative changed its name to “Valle y Vega”, but the PGS
initiative maintained the name of Ecovalle and is independent from the cooperative.
2.2. Data Collection and Analysis
In 2016, research began with exploratory fieldwork based on semi-structured interviews with
five regional key actors [44], followed by a questionnaire based on the design of Kaufmann [45]. Field
research was supplemented by participant observation, i.e., participation in farm visits, meetings,
fieldwork and social gatherings, a field diary, pictures and the collection of documents [46,47].
As a next step, within each initiative, snowball and purposive sampling was used [46] to
ensure the variety of stakeholders (consumer groups, Non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
shops) and areas involved were covered. In total 29 structured interviews were conducted (22
producers, three members of consumer groups, three members of NGOs and one owner of a shop).
All semi-structured and structured interviews were recorded using a digital voice recorder (SONY
ICD PX333, Sony Corporation, Tokyo, Japan).
The structured interview included pre-coded questions, but also several open questions as well.
The answers to these open questions were analyzed as qualitative data. The qualitative data were
given numerical values and analyzed quantitatively in just two cases. This was for the use of the
word “agroecology” and for statements about the members’ political motivations. For the latter, topics
related to politics (e.g., food sovereignty, demonstrations, political parties) or the direct use of the
words “political” or “politics” were counted as political motivation (Table A1).).
For two questions, interviewees had to rank the importance of a list of proposed statements (about
the current status of their PGS initiatives and their motivations for joining PGS) (Table A1)).
All raw quantitative data were recorded in an Excel table (Microsoft Office package, 2010) and
analyzed using SPSS (version 21) forWindows (IBM SPSS 2012). The analysis used was descriptive
analysis and cross-tabulation. The significance of the association between PGS initiatives and the
selected variables was tested using Fisher’s exact test, which was carried out at a significance level
of 5%. To analyze qualitative information, the recorded interviews were transcribed using Listen N
Write (Listen N Write 2016, Elefant Software, Italy) and coded with Atlas.ti (Atlas.ti 2012, Scientific
Software Development GmbH, Berlin, Germany). Descriptive and values coding were used to create
the codes. A conceptual order display was then created with the qualitative data [46,48,49].
2.3. “Producer” vs. “Farmer”
In the literature, the words “farmer” and “producer” often appear in the same text without a clear
definition of or differentiation between the terms. Nonetheless, it is considered important to make
a distinction between the two terms for this paper. The Oxford dictionary [50] defines producer as
“a person, company, or country that makes, grows, or supplies goods or commodities for sale”, while a
farmer is defined as “a person who owns or manages a farm”. According to this definition, while a
farmer does not have to be personally involved in the production process (another person might work
the land he or she owns), a producer has to “make, grow or supply goods”. However, agriculture is
implicit in the word “farmer”, but “producer” can also be used to talk about non-agricultural products.
Interviewees mainly used the term producer and “producer” rather than “farmer” is always used
in the documents collected from the PGS initiatives studied. Moreover, interviewees never talked
about farms but about projects. One reason for this might be that not all producers work on a farm,
252
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
but might produce other food products such as honey (beekeeping) or bread. There are probably
several other reasons for the preferred use of the term “producer” over “farmer”, but they are not
relevant for the purposes of this article.
The term “producer” has been used in this article because the interviewees themselves used it.
“Producer” here means people who produce food goods that come either directly from agriculture or
from the processing of agricultural products. The term “farmer” is only used in the literature review
where it was actually used in the literature. “Farmer” refers to those working in agriculture, whether
or not they own the farm.
3. Results
3.1. Main Characteristics of Members of the Three PGS Initiatives
The arithmetic mean age of the interviewees (n = 29) was 40.3, with ages ranging between 27 and
60 years old. A total of 72.7% of the interviewees had a university degree and in the case of Ecovalle
none of the members came from Granada (Table A1).
A total of 85.7% of all the members of the three PGS initiatives were producers. Other stakeholders
involved in the studied PGS initiatives were NGOs, food cooperatives (FoodCoop), a consumer
association and shops. The various stakeholders had their own particular characteristics and functions
in the three PGS initiatives, but all stakeholders participated equally in running the PGS initiative
(Table 1).
Table 1. Stakeholders involved in the three PGS initiatives studied, their numbers and functions (based
on authors’ own quantitative and qualitative data).
Stakeholders
PGS Initiatives Function Based on the Perception of Interviewees; n = 29
Ecollaures Vecinos Campesinos Ecovalle
Producers * 25 29 6 Production
NGOs 3 0 0
Support (technical, economical . . . )
Dissemination of PGS
Supporting access to public bodies
Outside (external) point of view
Political lobbying
FoodCoops ** 2 0 0 Communication about PGS (networking)
Providing the consumers’ point of view
Distribution and consumption of produce
Voluntary work
Consumer
association 0 1 0
Shops 0 4 0
Communication (information about PGS in the shops)
Commercialisation of produce
Voluntary work
Total 30 34 6
* The number of producers corresponds to the so-called ‘units of production’, i.e., more than one person might be
involved in a unit of production, but in this study this unit will be counted as one producer. ** A FoodCoop (food
cooperative) is an association of consumers that is self-organized and purchases organic and local products that
have been produced under fair work conditions. FoodCoops operate a democratic decision-making system based
on the participation of members through the distribution of labor and responsibilities. The members seek a direct
relationship with producers and thus avoid intermediaries [51,52].
A total of 43% of the interviewed producers had TPC as well as PGS, and their areas under
cultivation varied between 3000 m2 and 13 ha, with an arithmetic mean across the three PGS initiatives
of 2.25 ha (Table A1). Of the 22 producers interviewed, five were able to live on agriculture alone.
The other 17 producers had another income alongside agriculture, either from their own personal
additional income or additional income from their partner.
Agriculture represented 54% of the producers’ income (arithmetic mean across PGS initiatives)
(Table A1). Producers from Ecollaures had the highest percentage of income from agriculture compared
to the other two PGS initiatives (73.5% arithmetic mean, Fisher’s exact, n = 22, p < 0.05) (Figure 2)
(Table A1).
253
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
Figure 2. Percentage of domestic income coming from organic agriculture (OA) per PGS initiative
studied. The 100% = total family and farm income as perceived by the interviewees. (Ecollaures: n = 10;
Vecinos Campesinos: n = 9; Ecovalle: n = 5). Significant difference between PGS initiatives studied
(Fisher’s exact, n = 24, p < 0.05) (own data, SPSS (version 21) forWindows).
3.2. Motivations for Joining a PGS Initiative
There was no relationship between the different PGS initiatives studied and the degree of
importance attributed by the interviewees to the different statements about why they decided to
join a PGS initiative (Fisher’s exact, n = 22, p > 0.05). Interviewees considered PGS to be a tool for
social change and a (very) important reason for joining the PGS initiative (Table A1). More than 50% of
the interviewed producers did not consider as important the fact that implementing a PGS is cheaper
than implementing a TPC (Table A1). Moreover, the possibility of a higher income with the PGS was
not a reason for producers to join the PGS initiatives. However, the establishment of a community
of producers, consumers and other stakeholders and mutual support were very important to the
producers (Table A1) because they shared similar values and ideology. In addition to the proposed
statements, interviewees also mentioned other motivations for joining their PGS initiatives such as
marketing advantages and less bureaucracy than TPC.
Disagreement with the current certification system was a significant factor in joining/creating
their PGS initiatives mainly for producers. Some interviewees perceived TPC to be easier for larger
producers with monocultures, and that “it does not meet the needs of small producers”. Therefore,
the interviewees wanted to differentiate themselves from TPC and “other kinds of organic producers”.
One member said they did not want to certify products but “certify or guarantee processes, projects
and collectives, and people”.
Interviewees perceived PGS to be more interactive, real and fair than TPC. The socioeconomic
criteria included in the internal regulation of the PGS initiatives studied were an important motivation
for the interviewees, especially the fact that the three PGS initiatives studied consider employees’
working conditions, support the viability of the projects and include the biodiversity of the fields.
Interviewees explained that their PGS initiative was better adapted to their reality and that “PGS go
further and give the organic products extra value; PGS show the real work behind organic production”.
Other stakeholders of the PGS initiatives (i.e., consumers’ groups, shops and NGOs) perceive
as main drivers for joining or creating a PGS initiative the support of local producers and the direct
254
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
relation to them, the promotion of local products and the fact that PGS is a tool for social change.
Other important motivations were related to the production methods used by the producers (organic,
environmental care) and the quality of the products (variety, healthiness). The implication of NGOs in
the PGS initiatives seems especially important to them in order to get to know the reality of producers
and consumers in the organic scene, so that they can organize projects or campaigns according to the
realities and needs of producers and consumers. Moreover, being part of PGS helps NGOs building
bridges between the civil society and the agrarian sector. On the other side, consumers and shops are
part of the decision making of the PGS and this way they are able to participate in the decision process
linked to their food.
Consumers who join the studied PGS look for organic, local and healthy foods. In the cases of
Ecollaures and Vecinos Campesinos, consumers’ groups and shops participate in decision making and
even were part of the creation of the PGS initiatives. This involvement allows them to adapt the PGS
also to their needs, e.g., discuss prices and crops with producers, visit the fields, agree on production
method and in general being informed about the food they consume.
All stakeholders in the PGS initiatives discuss together in assemblies and field visits all possible
matters related, not only to their internal organization, but also to more general issues such as values,
social implications (working conditions), environmental impacts of their production methods or
retail, etc.
Some interviewees explicitly expressed a political motivation. The statistical analysis suggested
that there was a significant relationship between the PGS initiatives studied and the frequency of
terms used that could be attributed to the explicit political motivation of their members (Fisher’s exact,
n = 29, p < 0.05). Whereas members of Ecovalle and Vecinos Campesinos did not mention any political
motivation during the interviews, 40% of the members of Ecollaures interviewed explicitly perceived
PGS to be a political tool (Table A1). While participating in different activities run by Ecollaures
and Ecovalle, the members of these PGS initiatives were found to participate or have participated in
political activities such as demonstrations, the 11-M movement, talks, events from left-wing parties,
etc. Topics such as food sovereignty or farmers’ rights came up several times during the research.
The relationship between the use of the word “agroecology” (the number of interviewees who
used the term at least once) and the political motivation shown by the interviewees was analyzed.
The results indicated a strong and significant relationship between the use of “agroecology” and
political motivation (Fisher’s exact, n = 31, p < 0.05). Thus, interviewees who used the word
“agroecology” were likely to be politically motivated. There was also a significant relationship between
the PGS initiatives studied and the frequency of the use of the word “agroecology” (Fisher’s exact,
n = 31, p < 0.05). A total of 80% of the interviewees from Ecollaures (n = 100% = 16) and 60% from
Ecovalle (n = 100% = 5) used the word “agroecology” (or derivatives of it) during the interviews, while
none of the members of Vecinos Campesinos interviewed (n = 100% = 11) used this word (Table A1).
In the words of the interviewees from Ecollaures and Ecovalle, “agroecology is not the same as organic
agriculture”, “its definition is so broad and deep ( . . . ) that we have to break it down into its true
meaning so the consumer is more aware of it”, “agroecology includes social factors” and “it’s organic
agriculture understood in a broad sense”.
3.3. Achievements of the Three PGS Initiatives Studied
The interviewees claimed that despite the initial motivations of the members of the PGS initiatives
studied, not all of them might be fulfilled. Interviewees perceived the community, network and
exchange within the PGS initiative as the most important achievements of their PGS initiatives
(Table A1). Interviewees felt supported by other members and that they learned from one other,
not only about agricultural techniques but also social skills. Interviewees were satisfied with the group
formed in their PGS initiatives, despite the internal issues they might face.
Another achievement perceived by interviewees was the extra (non-monetary) value PGS
conferred on their products. These values were established by the members of each PGS initiative and
255
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
are summarized in their internal regulation. Almost 80% of the interviewees were (very) satisfied with
their internal regulation (Table A1), but they considered their own PGS initiative to be an active system
that is continuously developing alongside the internal regulation. They mentioned that the internal
regulation could be improved and some parts of it should be revised as the first drafts were produced
without any experience. Interviewees considered that producers in the PGS differentiate themselves
from organic producers with TPC, and that their PGS initiative represents their kind of production,
as they expected.
Some other expectations met by the PGS initiatives were product quality, transparency, control,
education and personal satisfaction. Transparency and control were achieved through the farm
inspections and daily interaction between members. Some members perceived the farm visit to be an
important part of their PGS initiative because it is a tool for checking that the others are producing
according to the principles established by their PGS initiatives. One member of Ecovalle considered
day-to-day life with the other members as fundamental for the trust built within the PGS initiative and
assurance of compliance.
The implication of consumers in PGS initiatives increased their interest on eating healthier and
organic. For example, one shop (member of a PGS initiative) mentioned that they try to create
awareness among consumers about the benefits of organic products for the environment and their own
health. They included in their stock different kind of vegetables, not so common among the typical
Spanish consumer, and explain to them the benefits of these products and even how to cook them.
This was done by other producers and shops too.
Interviewees from Ecollaures and Ecovalle also perceived the commercial opportunities and
political battles as achievements. Some markets in Valencia and Granada have started to accept PGS as
a guarantee of organic products, with producers allowed to sell them as organic. Interviewees from
these PGS initiatives perceived ongoing improvement in the acceptance of PGS in local markets. In the
case of Ecollaures, some interviewed members perceived this success in part to be a result of their
political work. They also acknowledged the important work of NGOs in fighting for farmers’ rights,
the widespread use of the word “agroecology” and acceptance of PGS as a valid guarantee.
3.4. Challenges Perceived by PGS Members
Although producers with PGS might be able to sell their products in some Spanish markets,
PGS is still not formally accepted as an organic certification and producers are not officially allowed
to sell their products as organic. Interviewees were asked about the importance of future legislative
recognition of PGS in Spain. Here, interviewees had to evaluate its importance from none to very high
(Figure 3). However, before answering the question, several interviewees considered it important to
re-define “recognition”. Interviewees differentiated between three kinds of recognition:
• legislative recognition: refers to the question asked as to whether PGS are considered a legal
certification system as TPC bodies;
• institutional recognition: the acceptance of PGS by public institutions, so that PGS initiatives
have a political voice and are allowed to sell their products as organic (at least on a local scale),
but without being an official certification body;
• social recognition: consumer acceptance of PGS as a valid guarantee system that consumers
can trust.
Interviewees evaluated legislative recognition and some of them pointed out the importance of
the other two types of recognition. Interviewees who considered the importance of the legislative
recognition of PGS to be (very) low (Table A1) perceived social recognition to be more important than
legal recognition. They considered that social recognition could be enough to help producers with
commercialization. Other interviewees perceived institutional recognition to be important so that
PGS can establish communication on a political level. There were also those who did not consider
256
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
any of these types of recognition as important and perceived the current independence of PGS as an
advantage (Figure 3).
Some interviewed producers mentioned that they were in their PGS initiatives because they
preferred group certification. Nevertheless, they had been forced to have TPC because some shops or
consumers have demanded TPC in order to reassure consumers that they are buying organic products.
These producers stated that as soon as PGS was recognized as a valid organic guarantee, they would
no longer certify their products under TPC. These producers also admitted that the high amount of
voluntary work and time compared to TPC were major obstacles to adopting PGS.
One interviewee mentioned the difficulty in finding a balance between family duties and the
PGS initiative, as the work required for PGS involved a considerable investment of time. In general,
time constraints were perceived to be a problem and an obstacle to members’ participation in their
PGS initiatives. Although 76.6% of interviewees (n = 100% = 29) considered producers’ participation to
be normal or high (Table A1), they mentioned the participation of all members (not only consumers) as
one of the main challenges. The interviewees considered the low participation of their PGS members
to be a problem that might eventually lead to just a few members doing all the work (or to “burn out”).
Consumer participation was reported as being especially low. This was perceived as a challenge that
the interviewees did not know how to address. The interviewees proposed some reasons for low
consumer participation such as disinterest, other priorities, lack of need or consumers not finding
participation appealing.
“Organization” was mentioned several times as a challenge related to participation. According to
the interviewees, “organization” was understood to be the effectiveness of committees and working
groups (e.g., in completing tasks), the planning of meetings and farm inspections (e.g., establishing
and implementing a calendar of farm inspections), the compilation and formulation of documents,
preparation of events and communication of achievements. The perceived low level of participation
was thought to influence the organization of PGS initiatives (Table A1). Interviewees perceived that
the low participation of members in their PGS initiatives made organizational matters more difficult.
Based on what the interviewees said, efficiency was mainly defined by the performance of
meetings (duration, communication between members, capacity for decision-making, participation
of members, ability to focus on topics relevant to the PGS initiatives), but also by the quality of the
farm inspections and the work undertaken during the year (communication, workshops, publicity,
document management, involvement of members etc.). Interviewees perceived the progress of their
PGS initiative to be slow. Moreover, interviewees felt that they did not know how to work in a
participatory manner, making it difficult to take decisions in a participatory and horizontal way.
As communication tools for sharing information and the decisions made, the initiatives and their
members mainly used emails and WhatsApp, which were not always perceived as the best methods.
Some interviewees perceived the communication of their PGS initiatives as a challenge that still
needed to be addressed (Table A1). Interviewees found publicity of their PGS in the media too low
and wanted this to change. Ecollaures was still working on its website, whereas Ecovalle and Vecinos
Campesinos had a WordPress site. Interviewees believed publicity could raise awareness among
the Spanish population. The lack of professional communication was mentioned as one reason for
consumers not participating in PGS initiatives.
Other challenges mentioned were personal issues between the members, the economic viability
of the projects and product prices (Table 2). One interviewee mentioned that it is sometimes “difficult
to ensure that technical problems do not affect personal relationships”. The dispersal of members
was perceived to be a problem by the members of Ecollaures and Vecinos Campesinos. Most of the
members of Ecollaures lived near Valencia, but some were in villages a long way from the city, even in
the southern region of Alicante. The problem was more pronounced in the case of Vecinos Campesinos
as all its members were dispersed in the regions of Murcia and Alicante. The maximum distance
between members of Vecinos Campesinos was approximately 140 km. However, the members of
Ecovalle lived within walking distance of one another in the same village.
257
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
Ecollaures Vecinos
campesinos
Ecovalle SPG Mean
% of members
Studied PGS Initiatives
None
Very low
Low
Normal
High
Very high
Figure 3. Perception of the interviewed members of the three PGS initiatives about the level of
importance of possible future legislative recognition of PGS in Spain (Ecollaures: n = 100% = 14;
Vecinos Campesinos: n = 100% = 10; Ecovalle: n = 100% = 4). No significant difference was found
between the PGS initiatives studied (Fisher’s exact, n = 29, p > 0.05) (own data, Excel, Microsoft Office
package, 2010).
Table 2. Challenges perceived by the interviewees in the three PGS initiatives studied (own creation
from qualitative data).
Challenges
Consumer involvement
Economic viability
Efficiency
Legality/official recognition
Dispersal of members
Participation
Personal matters
Prices
3.5. Opportunities for Improvement
Interviewees were aware of the challenges faced by their PGS initiatives and wanted to overcome
them in order to improve the initiatives. Several interviewees perceived a need to rely on a hired
person who would be in charge of running their PGS initiative (Table 3). They said that producers
had too much work and no time to run it. These interviewees thought that an employee would help
make progress with their PGS initiative as this person would have more time and the skills needed for
the tasks. The PGS initiatives studied were based on voluntary work, but “sometimes it is too much
( . . . ) and a level of specialization might be good”. However, interviewees were also concerned that
hiring somebody might increase the annual fee for the PGS initiatives, result in members participating
less in other activities, and that the PGS might require external support (producer associations, NGOs,
universities, etc.).
As a way of improving the efficiency of the PGS initiatives studied, members felt that meetings
should be more efficient (Table 3). Interviewees from Ecollaures found a workshop on communication
skills in participatory-horizontal systems to be particularly helpful and would like to have more events
like this. The workshop was about facilitation tools for participative meetings and they have noticed a
great improvement in their meetings since the workshop.
Topics discussed during the assemblies were the development and improvement of the internal
regulation and farm inspection checklist (Farm inspection checklists are also called “visit guides”
locally). A total of 64% of the interviewees were (very) satisfied with their farm inspection checklist
(Table A1), but they believed that the farm inspection checklist could still be improved. The general
guarantee process (farm inspection checklist plus farm inspection) was also perceived as (very) good
(69% of interviewees) (Table A1). In the case of Ecollaures they would like to have different checklists
for different products and actors, but they are still working on this (Table 3). A total of 75.6% were (very)
258
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
satisfied with the internal regulation (Table A1). However, the guarantee process was also perceived to
be not good or serious enough by some interviewees (Table A1). Those interviewees perceived that
some members did not take the farm inspection seriously and attributed more importance to the social
part of it than checking the farm inspection checklist and monitoring that the producer was doing
everything right because these members knew the producer and might take it for granted that he/she
was working to their standards.
Alongside the potential internal improvements, some producers interviewed were concerned
about their production costs (for inputs, machines etc.) and would like to share some costs with other
producers in their PGS initiative (Table 3). In the case of Vecinos Campesinos, some interviewed
producers perceived production costs to be an important challenge and would like to form an
agricultural cooperative and have a distributor selling the products produced by their PGS initiative.
They mentioned a wish to have a distributor for more PGS initiatives so that producers from different
PGS initiatives could sell their products together. Although this idea was not shared by many
interviewees, they all considered it essential to build a PGS network, not for commercialization
purposes, but to make the movement stronger in the country (Table 3). PGS in Spain have already
started to contact one another. In November 2015 and June 2016 there were two national meetings
at which various stakeholders in PGS in Spain met in order to get to know each other and discuss
common issues.
Table 3. Aspects perceived by the interviewees that would improve the PGS initiatives studied and
suggested tools for improvement (own qualitative data).
Requiring Improvement Suggestion
Meetings Respect, good moderator, facilitation workshop
Consumer involvement Guide for consumers, dissemination, establishing a physical headquarters, fun farm visits
Economic viability/costs * Collective purchase of inputs, production of seedlings in the PGS initiatives, exchange of products
Publicity Person in charge of publicity, collective communication work, awareness campaign
Organization Hired person, farm inspection calendar **
Participation Monitoring involvement, establishment of minimums
Quality Different guides for different products
Equality Different guides for different actors
Relationship with other
PGS initiatives Creation of a PGS network in Spain
Commercialization ** Collective commercialization (cooperative)
Rapid growth *** Duplication of the PGS initiative, stop admission of new members for a while
* Only producers perceived this to be an area requiring improvement and offered suggestions; ** Only mentioned
by members of Vecinos Campesinos; *** Only mentioned by members of Ecollaures.
4. Discussion
4.1. Motivations and Achievements
In other case studies of Latin America, Africa, Asia and Europe most PGS initiatives were initiated
by or through the help of other stakeholders, such as NGOs or farmers organizations [32,53]. e.g.,
in the case of a PGS initiative in Chapingo, Mexico, the initiative was created with support from
university and it was gradually taken over by producers [45]. There are also PGS initiatives that were
established with the help of a Market (e.g., in South Africa [53]); a network of Markets, such as the
Mexican network of tianguis and organic markets; or, as it happens in the Philippines, with the help of
an association of sustainable agriculture. These PGS initiatives were mainly established to support
small-holder local producers by offering them affordable alternatives to third party certification [53].
In these cases where PGS initiatives were not started by producers, organizers might have had to
convince potential member producers of the advantages of PGS [30]. In our case, on the other hand,
the studied PGS initiatives were initiated by already-motivated farmers themselves who later on looked
for the support of other stakeholders. The high level of education compared to other PGS initiatives
259
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
might explain why their PGS initiatives were not initiated by another organization. This might also
influence their motivations for joining or funding a PGS initiative.
The subject of lower costs of PGS compared to TPC usually appears alongside less paperwork or
bureaucracy as the main advantages of PGS in different studies about PGS worldwide [1,6,24–27,29,42,53,54].
Even though producers in the PGS initiatives studied agreed on the importance of low costs and less
paperwork, these were not the main reasons for joining the PGS initiatives. This might be due to the
members’ high level of education and the fact that most producers had additional income alongside
agriculture. In addition, almost half of the interviewed producers also had TPC and had to deal
with the related paperwork anyway. Moreover, in contrast to other PGS initiatives, e.g., in Mexico,
producers of the PGS initiatives studied did not share their costs or their sales (In the case of Ecovalle,
interviewees did not consider PGS to be part of the cooperative. They only used the PGS initiative to
guarantee their products and the cooperative was separate from it, thus reference is also only made
here to the PGS initiative), which explains why the financial and job security motivations found in
agricultural cooperatives were not identified in this study [55]. Previous studies about PGS in other
countries (e.g., Mexico, Brazil, India, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines, etc. [23,29,34,53]) have not
shown that producers who are members of a PGS also have TPC. One exception is Natur et Progrés in
France [25]. In the present study producers were found to have both PGS and TPC. This was due to
the lack of legislative recognition of PGS in the EU. Producers with only PGS are not allowed to sell
their products as organic, except on rare occasions informally established by local authorities [14,56].
Thus, producers of the PGS initiatives studied were not motivated by economic or market access
advantages, but by the community building and the extra value added to their products among others.
Producers sought to differentiate themselves from other organic producers who did not share their
values. PGS members share the values of sustainable agriculture that go beyond an input-substitution
production and include a broader definition of organic [23,39]. According to a member of another
PGS initiative in Spain: “PGS is not an administrative procedure, PGS is based on trust and takes into
account social aspects such as respect for workers, food miles and how farm inputs travel from inputs’
suppliers” [56].
This desire for differentiation was also at a political level, which had already been found in
Ecovalle by De la Cruz (2015) [42]. In the Global South some politically motivated funding agencies
started PGS initiatives because they considered PGS to be more democratic than TPC and decided
to make a political statement by supporting PGS. Without previous studies of the local markets
or their simultaneous development, the sole political motivation of the funding agencies has been
criticized because the reason for starting the PGS initiatives might not have been appropriate for
local producers [30]. However, in the present cases, producers themselves instead of external funding
agencies were politically motivated and considered PGS to be a tool for social change.
Since 2011, there has been growing discontent with national and European politics and with
the global economic system among young people in Spain. Due to the economic crisis that began
in 2008, young (mainly high-educated) Spaniards formed the 15-M movement in 2011 to express their
disagreement with national politics and the global economic system [57,58]. Members of the PGS
initiatives studied here sympathized with the movement and it might have influenced their desire
to use PGS as a political tool and differentiate themselves from the certification system dictated by
the EU. The PGS initiatives studied are to be seen as a protest movement against modern industrialized
agriculture [59].
As a symbol of their protest, Ecollaures and Ecovalle use the word “agroecology” instead of
“organic”. Although the EU regulation does not directly forbid use of the term “agroecology”, it does
protect the words “organic”, “ecological” and “biological” and their derivatives [14]. As agroecology
is actually a derivative of ecological, its use is not allowed in the EU for non-certified organic
producers. The members of the PGS initiatives studied would like free use of the term agroecology to
sell their products, as happens in many countries in the Global South. For example in Ecuador,
producers with PGS are allowed to sell their products at local markets just by using the word
260
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
agroecological instead of organic [56]. According to the interviewees, agroecology is a better
definition of their products than organic. Although, there are many definitions of “agroecology”
in the literature, these definitions agree on the common socio-political interpretation of the term
agroecology. From the socio-political point of view, agroecology is defined as a tool for the defense,
(re)configuration and transformation of rural areas and the key to revitalizing small farming systems
and food sovereignty [60–63]. Rover et al. (2016) [35] (p. 11) also found that members of the Brazilian
agroecology network, Rede Ecovida, were motivated by an “ideological engagement by transforming
the model of rural development, based on agroecology and biodiversity”. The PGS initiatives studied
and Ecovida are not only interested in production, but in new ways of rural development that consider
the reality of each ecosystem and territory [35].
Nonetheless, the fact that the members of the PGS initiatives studied wanted to go beyond TPC
might also carry a potential risk that should be considered. In a PGS initiative in New Zealand,
there was a trend of making PGS more complex, e.g., by increasing the amount of paperwork for
farmers [29]. PGS should be an inclusive system and the desire to include stricter standards than
TPC might sometimes be too ambitious, thus making PGS more inaccessible than TPC [23]. The PGS
initiatives studied here were aware of this risk and reacted flexibly while including the aspects of
agroecology that they consider important.
Apart from the desire to include other aspects of agroecology in PGS, one of the main motivations
and achievements was the mutual support and community formed in the PGS initiatives studied.
Producers felt supported and satisfied with their colleagues and this might be reflected in trust and
guarantee the integrity of their members [25]. PGS are not merely certification systems, but rather
communities that are seeking mutual support, local and fair commercialization, improvement in the
local ecology and education for the local population [31]. Moreover, the horizontal network has the
capability to efficiently transmit information and create incentives to behave in a trustworthy way
that strengthens the community [64]. This horizontal and democratic system allows producers to
elaborate and control their own standards, which empowers producers, one of the characteristics of
PGS suggested by IFOAM [25,65].
The importance of community seems to be a characteristic shared by different alternative
food networks that are based on collective and democratic action, such as Community Supported
Agriculture (CSA), FoodCoop or networks of farmers’ markets [26,66–69]. Nonetheless, in contrast
to this study’s results, the building of a community is not identified as one of the main motivations
for joining a CSA, but as an intrinsic characteristic of CSA [66,70,71]. In their research about CSA in
the USA, Brehm and Eisenhauer (2008) [66] (p. 110) found that “strong community attachment
clearly has a positive influence on motivations for joining a CSA ( . . . ) but community is not
always a strong motivation for joining a CSA”. In contrast, the main motivations for joining a
CSA are the quality of the products, while in the PGS initiatives studied these motivations were not
identified [69–71]. One motivation shared by the PGS initiatives studied and CSA is the support of
organic local producers and products [70]. While there are several studies about motivation in CSA,
few studies address motivations in PGS. More research is needed to identify why producers, consumers
and other stakeholders want to join or start a PGS initiative.
4.2. Challenges and Potential Improvements
The present study shows that the three PGS initiatives shared three of the most common challenges
reported in the literature: involving consumers in the PGS initiative, gaining recognition and support
from authorities, and relying on voluntary work. One or more of these challenges have been found
in PGS initiatives in East Africa, Brazil, South Africa, Peru, Mexico, India, Philippines, France and
Spain [6,25,31,32,40,42,53].
The results indicate that the low level of consumer involvement might be due to the lack of
legislative recognition and limited dissemination of PGS in Spain. Even though many interviewed
producers inform their consumers about PGS, there is a high level of ignorance about PGS among
261
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
Spanish consumers [6,32]. The lack of legislative recognition make consumers doubt the credibility
of the organic products from PGS if they do not know either the producers or the PGS initiative [6].
Credibility is a difficult concept in organic agriculture, so consumers have to trust the producers’
quality claims. There are many different quality signs which leads to more confusion rather than
an indication for buyers. Besides, there are many situations in which quality claims are weakened
due to producers breaking the law [18]. For these reasons, dialogue with consumers to sustain trust
can be more important than specific information about traceability or production techniques [72].
In support of this statement, Pole and Gray (2012) [71] (p. 96) found that members of a CSA in New
York considered the relationship with the farmer to be an essential aspect of CSA.
Nonetheless, in a broader environment than the PGS initiative itself, public policies in Spain,
as in Brazil, could substantially foster PGS, improve its legitimacy and increase the involvement of
the state and other public and/or private bodies [9,68]. Cuéllar (2008) [6] argues that a certain degree
of legislative recognition of PGS in Spain is necessary to improve the situation of PGS in the country
and increase the number of Spanish PGS initiatives. However, legislative recognition presents some
challenges when trying to include PGS in a legal framework so that it preserves its core principles [25].
Indeed, the interviewees were aware of these challenges and for this reason proposed institutional
and social recognition as alternatives. The interviewees were afraid that legislative recognition of PGS
could result in strict hierarchical structures and increase bureaucracy, threatening the essence of PGS
and converging with the TPC system [56]. However, in some countries PGS have developed different
strategies in recent years to work within the legal framework.
In Mexico, PGS initiatives met the government to design a new regulation of organic products
in a participatory way. Although PGS was finally included in organic law, the process demonstrated
the difficulty of achieving consensus [23]. Ultimately Mexico, like Chile, recognized PGS as a valid
guarantee system for organic products only for small producers and at local markets or through direct
marketing (no export) [23,56]. Yet the legal recognition of PGS in Mexico requires that PGS initiatives
must comply with the Mexican law for organic products which can be burdensome for the producers
and even unachievable. The increase of bureaucracy together with the time constrains of the producers
makes it difficult for producer to obtain the legal recognition [45], as the interviewees of our study fear
it could happen if PGS are legally recognized in Spain.
In the USA, the US Department of Agriculture allows producers with a gross annual revenue equal
to or less than $5000 to sell their products as organic in the local market without TPC. This scenario
leaves some space for PGS [14,73]. Thus, a financial threshold that suits the Spanish context and is
high enough to include all the desired producers could be defined, making space for PGS to work as a
valid guarantee system for organic production in Spain [74].
Nevertheless, in most Latin American countries where PGS are officially recognized,
PGS initiatives are overseen by the same regulative body as the TPC system. In Bolivia, Paraguay,
Ecuador and Costa Rica small producers are allowed to use PGS as a guarantee of organic production
on the national market. However PGS initiatives are then audited by the national Food Safety Authority
in most cases [56]. Ecollaures and Ecovalle can be compared to the Peruvian case where PGS are not
officially recognised on a national level, but the municipalities or markets support and recognize PGS
as a valid guarantee for organic production [56].
Apart from official recognition of PGS, in order to assure consumers of the system’s legitimacy,
PGS should also be sufficiently formal and members should build trust properly within the PGS
initiatives [23]. However, the interviewees admitted the challenge of combining this formality
with the characteristic comradeship of PGS. This challenge is typical for cooperatives as the
internal tension between efficiency and cooperation are competing views that are always present
in collective actions [75]. This and other internal matters seem to be a common challenge in PGS
initiatives [6,32,42,53].
Internal matters can lead to conflicts and divisions within the community. In collectives
such as PGS, interpersonal issues and differences of opinion among members present a significant
262
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
challenge [31]. The democratic processes facilitate conflict due to the close proximity and face-to-face
decision-making that can lead to an emotional and confrontational environment during meetings [75].
Differences in opinions amongst PGS members and the refusal to compromise and accept others’
opinions might result in conflict and separation of PGS initiatives [45]. To avoid conflict and
improve the efficiency of PGS initiatives, especially in decision-making, members must establish
and uphold standards. These standards have to be clear on issues such as exclusion from the system,
monitoring procedures and sanctions for non-compliance [28]. IFOAM (2007) [27] also acknowledges
the importance of the clear and prior definition of these issues in order to guide PGS initiatives to put
into practice the key elements of PGS as defined by IFOAM.
Another internal issue that affects the PGS initiatives studied was the perceived low level of
member participation. In institutions for collective actions such as PGS or agriculture cooperatives,
a broad-based commitment and equal degree of participation are the most common challenges faced
by members [28,75]. For example, in CSA consumers also acknowledge their wish to volunteer in
CSA and support the farmers, “but their busy lives and hectic schedules often prevent participation
and active involvement” [71] (p. 97). The present study’s results show that the different stakeholders
involved in the PGS initiatives also faced time constraints and there was general dissatisfaction with
the level of participation by members. One explanation for this dissatisfaction could be the difference
in the members’ perceptions of their participation and the participation of the other members [76].
The commitment required to participate in meeting can lead to a decline in the quality of democratic
decision-making [75]. Time constraints can influence the continuity of the certification process [45]
and this might be another reason for the mentioned low efficiency of the PGS initiatives. Nevertheless,
a study with a focus on the members’ motivation (including consumers) for participation in PGS could
help draw more precise conclusions about members’ participation and commitment to PGS.
Bouagnimbeck (2014) [53] (p. 58) found that long distances between members of the PGS initiatives
and from market to market are a challenge related to time constraints for PGS initiatives in India,
Brazil and South Africa. This challenge was not found in the PGS initiatives studied here. Instead
the toll on family and free time were considered to be important reasons affecting participation in
the PGS initiatives studied. One solution already proposed by producers in the first Andalusian PGS
initiatives that is working in some other PGS initiatives (e.g., PGS El Encinar, Granada, Spain) is to
have an employee that takes care of the administration, organization and communication of the PGS
initiative [6]. Hiring employees for democratic cooperatives has been criticized because it defeats the
purpose of the cooperative by creating two types of members [77]. Nonetheless Hernandez (2006) [75]
(p. 130) argues for the importance of democracy in the decision-making process of cooperatives,
including the choice of whether or not to employ someone. In the PGS initiatives studied here, there is
a division of opinion on this matter.
5. Conclusions
Producers of the PGS initiatives studied look for a seal that reflects the work and values behind
their products. Their discontent with the current TPC system and the need for a system that assesses
their method of production are the main motivations for joining the PGS initiatives studied here.
Moreover, the community created through the PGS initiatives is important not only for producers,
but for other stakeholders as well.
Currently there are few commercial advantages obtained from being part of the PGS initiatives
studied. Instead, the main achievement perceived by members of these PGS initiatives was the
community created by their initiatives. The support, knowledge, exchange and social network of
the community were some of the benefits of PGS mentioned. The use of PGS as a political tool for
improving the situation of organic agriculture and alternative certification systems in Spain was also
an important goal of the PGS initiatives studied.
The main challenges perceived by the members of the PGS initiatives were the involvement
of consumers, participation of the members, official recognition and time constraints. Moreover,
263
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
communication between members and internal difficulties seemed to present a challenge for the PGS
initiatives studied. In order to overcome these internal challenges, external help is recommended,
following the example of Ecollaures. The establishment of a network of PGS in Spain might be helpful
to empower PGS and apply pressure for official recognition.
There is a general desire to improve and develop the PGS initiatives studied here. However,
until they receive some kind of recognition and the public are given more information, this growth
will be limited. The support of public or private organizations, as well as more research, may help PGS
develop further in Spain.
PGS might be an example of how people that want to support a different food system to the
current one (more ecological, social and fair) come together and create their own initiatives that
nowadays have even become a global movement. They reflect a consciousness among consumers,
producers and other stakeholder about a healthier food system, not only in terms of human health,
but also for the environment.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization and methodology, M.L.C., C.R.V. and M.C.P.; Investigation,
M.L.C.; writing—original draft preparation: M.L.C.; writing—review and editing, C.R.V., M.C.P. and M.L.C;
Supervision, C.R.V.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank the members of Ecollaures, Ecovalle and Vecinos Campesinos for
their support, kindness and willingness to collaborate with this project.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
264
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
Appendix A
Table A1. Summary of results.
Stakeholder Method Number of
Interviewees
Question
PGS Initiatives Studied Arithmetic Mean
in the PGS
Initiatives
STUDIED
Statistical
Analysis
Ecollaures
(EL)
Vecinos
Campesinos
(VC)
Ecovalle
(EV)
Fisher’s Exact
(p < 0.05)
All (producers,
FoodCoops,
consumers
association,
NGOs, shops)
Structured and
semi-structured
interviews
n = 31 (EL n = 15; VC
n = 11; EV n = 5) Age (years) 36.7 45.5 37.6 40.3 n.s.
n = 100% = 31 (EL n =
100% = 15; VC n =
100% = 11; EV n =
100% = 5)
Place of birth PGS region 67% 69% 0% 58% s.
Studies University degree 87% 46% 100% 73% n.s.
Interviewees who use the word “agroecology” 80% 0% 60% 47% s.
Interviewees who use of the word “politics” or related topics 40% 0% 0% 13% s.
n = 100% = 24 (EL n =
100% = 12; VC n =
100% = 8; EV n =
100% = 4)
Level of satisfaction
with the internal
regulation of their PGS
initiative
Very low 0% 0% 0% 0%
n.s.
Low 17% 0% 0% 6%
Average 58% 0% 0% 19%
High 25% 75% 50% 50%
Very high 0% 25% 50% 25%
No answer (n◦ interviewees) 3 2 0 -
n = 100% = 28 (EL n =
100% = 14; VC n =
100% = 10; EV n =
100% = 4)
Level of satisfaction
with the inspection
checklist of their PGS
initiative
Very low 0% 0% 0% 0%
n.s.
Low 0% 0% 0% 0%
Average 43% 30% 25% 33%
High 50% 60% 25% 45%
Very high 7% 20% 50% 26%
No answer (n◦ interviewees) 1 0 0 -
n = 100% = 28 (EL n =
100% = 14; VC n =
100% = 10; EV n =
100% = 4)
Level of satisfaction
with the
guarantee process of
their PGS initiative
Very low 0% 0% 0% 0%
n.s.
Low 7% 0% 0% 2%
Average 43% 10% 25% 26%
High 50% 90% 50% 63%
Very high 0% 0% 25% 8%
No answer (n◦ interviewees) 1 0 0 -
n = 100% = 29 (EL n =
Current status of
different aspects of the
studied PGS initiatives
Prepared statements Status
Feeling of community
with the members
Very poor 0% 0% 0% 0%
n.s.
Poor 0% 0% 0% 0%
OK 0% 0% 0% 0%
Good 60% 60% 0% 40%
Very good 40% 40% 100% 60%
Organisation
Very poor 0% 0% 0% 0%
n.s.
Poor 0% 0% 0% 0%
OK 27% 40% 50% 39%
Good 73% 60% 50% 61%
Very good 0% 0% 0% 0%
Communication
between members
Very poor 0% 0% 0% 0%
n.s.
Poor 0% 0% 0% 0%
OK 27% 20% 0% 16%
Good 73% 80% 75% 76%
Very good 0% 0% 25% 8%
265
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
Table A1. Cont.
Stakeholder Method Number of
Interviewees
Question
PGS Initiatives Studied Arithmetic Mean
in the PGS
Initiatives
STUDIED
Statistical
Analysis
Ecollaures
(EL)
Vecinos
Campesinos
(VC)
Ecovalle
(EV)
Fisher’s Exact
(p < 0.05)
Dissemination of PGS
Very poor 7% 0% 25% 11%
n.s.
Poor 20% 10% 0% 10%
OK 47% 80% 75% 67%
Good 27% 10% 0% 12%
Very good 0% 0% 0% 0%
Possibility to
participate in
decision-making
Very poor 0% 0% 0% 0%
n.s.
Poor 0% 0% 0% 0%
OK 0% 0% 0% 0%
Good 20% 20% 0% 13%
Very good 80% 80% 100% 87%
Relationship between
members
Very poor 0% 0% 0% 0%
n.s.
Poor 0% 0% 0% 0%
OK 0% 0% 0% 0%
Good 47% 40% 75% 54%
Very good 53% 60% 25% 46%
Internal
communication
methods used
Very poor 0% 0% 0% 0%
n.s.
Poor 0% 0% 0% 0%
OK 33% 30% 0% 21%
Good 7% 50% 75% 44%
Very good 0% 20% 25% 15%
Process of
decision-making
Very poor 0% 0% 0% 0%
n.s.
Poor 0% 0% 0% 0%
OK 13% 10% 0% 8%
Good 60% 60% 100% 73%
Very good 27% 30% 0% 19%
Perceived participation
of producers in the PGS
initiatives studied
Level of participation
Very low 0% 0% 0% 0%
n.s.
Low 8% 11% 0% 6%
Moderate 31% 56% 25% 37%
High 46% 22% 50% 39%
Very high 15% 11% 25% 17%
Perceived participation
of consumers in the
PGS initiatives studied
Level of participation
Very Low 31% 22% 0% 18%
n.s.
Low 54% 56% 0% 36%
Moderate 0% 22% 100% 41%
High 15% 0% 0% 5%
Very high 0% 0% 0% 0%
Perceived importance of
official recognition of
PGS in Spain
Level of importance
None 7% 0% 0% 2%
n.s.
Very low 7% 10% 0% 6%
Low 7% 0% 0% 2%
Moderate 21% 20% 25% 22%
High 21% 30% 0% 17%
Very high 36% 40% 75% 50%
266
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
Table A1. Cont.
Stakeholder Method Number of
Interviewees
Question
PGS Initiatives Studied Arithmetic Mean
in the PGS
Initiatives
STUDIED
Statistical
Analysis
Ecollaures
(EL)
Vecinos
Campesinos
(VC)
Ecovalle
(EV)
Fisher’s Exact
(p < 0.05)
Only Producers
n = 22 (EL n = 10; VC
n = 8; EV n = 4) Size of land (ha) 4 1 2 2 n.s.
n = 100% = 22 (EL n =
100% = 10; VC n =
100% = 8; EV n =
100% = 4)
% of annual home income from agriculture 74% 36% 53% 54% s.
TPC besides PGS 20% 63% 75% 46% n.s.
Motivations for
participating in the PGS
initiative
Prepared statements Level of
importance
Promotion of local
products
None 0% 13% 0% 4%
n.s.
Very low 0% 0% 0% 0%
Low 0% 0% 0% 0%
Average 0% 0% 0% 0%
High 40% 13% 0% 18%
Very high 60% 75% 100% 78%
Direct relationships
with consumers
None 0% 0% 0% 0%
n.s.
Very low 0% 0% 0% 0%
Low 0% 0% 0% 0%
Average 10% 0% 0% 3%
High 50% 25% 0% 25%
Very high 40% 75% 100% 72%
Raise awareness
among consumers
about organic
agriculture
None 0% 0% 0% 0%
n.s.
Very low 0% 0% 0% 0%
Low 0% 0% 0% 0%
Average 10% 25% 25% 20%
High 30% 38% 0% 23%
Very high 60% 38% 75% 58%
With PGS I can have
higher incomes
None 0% 38% 50% 29%
n.s.
Very low 20% 0% 0% 7%
Low 30% 13% 0% 14%
Average 20% 38% 50% 36%
High 20% 13% 0% 11%
Very high 10% 0% 0% 3%
This PGS initiative
establishes a
community of
producers
None 0% 0% 0% 0%
n.s.
Very low 0% 0% 0% 0%
Low 10% 0% 0% 3%
Average 0% 13% 0% 4%
High 30% 13% 50% 31%
Very high 60% 75% 50% 62%
PGS is cheaper
than TPC
None 60% 0% 75% 45% s.
Very low 10% 0% 0% 3%
Low 10% 0% 0% 3%
Average 20% 25% 0% 15%
High 0% 38% 25% 21%
Very high 0% 38% 0% 13%
267
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
Table A1. Cont.
Stakeholder Method Number of
Interviewees
Question
PGS Initiatives Studied Arithmetic Mean
in the PGS
Initiatives
STUDIED
Statistical
Analysis
Ecollaures
(EL)
Vecinos
Campesinos
(VC)
Ecovalle
(EV)
Fisher’s Exact
(p < 0.05)
The fact that PGS is a
tool for social change
None 0% 0% 0% 0% n.s.
Very low 0% 0% 0% 0%
Low 0% 0% 0% 0%
Average 0% 0% 0% 0%
High 40% 13% 0% 18%
Very high 60% 88% 100% 83%
The opportunity for
mutual support with
other producers
None 0% 13% 0% 4%
n.s.
Very low 0% 0% 0% 0%
Low 0% 0% 0% 0%
Average 0% 0% 0% 0%
High 30% 38% 25% 31%
Very high 70% 50% 75% 65%
The opinion of my
family/friends
None 50% 13% 75% 46%
n.s.
Very low 10% 0% 0% 3%
Low 10% 0% 0% 3%
Average 20% 38% 25% 28%
High 0% 25% 0% 8%
Very high 10% 0% 0% 3%
268
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
References
1. Coiduras Sánchez, P.; Díaz Álvarez, J.R.; Porcuna Coto, J.L. Situación y posibilidades de implantación de
la certificación participativa en agricultura ecológica. In Proceedings of the VII Congreso SEAE, Zaragoza,
Spain, 18–23 September 2006.
2. Tanner, B. Independent assessment by third-party certification bodies. Food Control 2000, 11, 415–417.
[CrossRef]
3. Certification of Organic Products. Available online: http://www.centroecologico.org.br/artigo_detalhe.
php?id_artigo=26 (accessed on 10 September 2018).
4. Jahn, G.; Schramm, M.; Spiller, A. The Reliability of Certification: Quality Labels as a Consumer Policy Tool.
J. Consum. Policy 2005, 28, 53–73. [CrossRef]
5. Getz, C.; Screck, A. What organic and Fair Trade labels do not tell us: Towards a place-based understanding
of certificatio. In. J. Consum. Stud. 2006, 30, 490–501. [CrossRef]
6. Cuéllar Padilla, M. Hacia un Sistema Participativo de Garantía para la Producción Ecológica en Andalucía.
Ph.D. Thesis, University of Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain, 2008.
7. Albersmeier, F.; Schulze, H.; Jahn, G.; Spiller, A. The reliability of third-party certification in the food chain:
From checklists to risk-oriented auditing. Food Control 2009, 20, 927–935. [CrossRef]
8. Padel, S.; Röcklinsberg, H.; Schmid, O. The implementation of organic principles and values in the European
Regulation for organic food. Food Policy 2009, 34, 245–251. [CrossRef]
9. Velleda Caldas, N.; Sacco dos Anjos, F.; Lozano Cabedo, C. La certificación de productos ecológicos en
España y Brasil. Agrociencia Uruguay 2014, 18, 163–171.
10. Certificación ‘de Papel’ o de Relaciones Humanas. Los Sistemas de Garantía Participativa como Iniciativas
de Soberanía Alimentaria Local. Available online: http://www.academia.edu/15030312/_Certificaci%
C3%B3n_de_papel_o_de_relaciones_humanas_Los_sistemas_de_garant%C3%ADa_participativa_
como_iniciativas_de_soberan%C3%ADa_alimentaria_local_Certification_on_paper_or_by_the_people_
Participatory_guarantee_systems_as_initiatives_for_local_food_sovereignty_in_Spanish_ (accessed on
31 October 2018).
11. Lotter, D.W. Organic Agriculture. J. Sustain. Agric. 2003, 21, 59–128. [CrossRef]
12. Vogl, C.R.; Kilcher, L.; Schmidt, H. Are Standards and Regulations of Organic Farming Moving Away from
Small Farmers’ Knowledge? J. Sustain. Agric. 2005, 26, 5–26. [CrossRef]
13. Hatanaka, M.; Bain, C.; Busch, L. Third-party certification in the global agrifood system. Food Policy 2005, 30,
354–369. [CrossRef]
14. The European Regulatory Framework and Its Implementation in Influencing Organic Inspection and
Certification Systems in the EU. Available online: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/277101680_
The_European_Regulatory_Framework_and_its_implementation_in_influencing_organic_inspection_
and_certification_systems_in_the_EU (accessed on 31 October 2018).
15. Vogl, C.R.; Axmann, P. Regelungsmechanismen im System des Ökologischen Landbaus. In Das System
Ökologischer Landbau; Freyer, B., Ed.; UTB Stuttgart: Stuttgart, Germany, 2016.
16. Padilla Bravo, C.; Villanueva Ramírez, I.; Neuendorff, J.; Spiller, A. Assessing the impact of unannounced
audits on the effectiveness and reliability of organic certification. Org. Agric. 2013, 3, 95–109. [CrossRef]
17. Corsin, F.; Funge-Smith, S.; Clausen, J. A Qualitative Assessment of Standards and Certification Schemes
Applicable to Aquaculture in the Asia-Pacific region. Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Available online: http://www.fao.org/docrep/010/ai388e/
ai388e00.htm (accessed on 14 September 2018).
18. Bryla, P. The perception of EU quality signs for origin and organic food products among Polish consumers.
Qual. Assur. Saf. Crop. Foods 2017, 9. [CrossRef]
19. Deaton, B.J. A theoretical framework for examining the role of third-party certifiers. Food Control 2004, 15,
615–619. [CrossRef]
20. Moser, C.; Hildebrandt, T.; Bailis, R. International Sustainability Standards and Certification. In Sustainable
Development of Biofuels in Latin America and the Caribbean; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2014; pp. 27–69.
[CrossRef]
21. Hatanaka, M. McSustainability and McJustice: Certification, alternative food and agriculture, and social
change. Sustainability 2014, 6, 8092–8112. [CrossRef]
269
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
22. Chkanikova, O.; Lehner, M. Private eco-brands and green market development: Towards new forms of
sustainability governance in the food retailing. J. Clean. Prod. 2015, 107, 74–84. [CrossRef]
23. Nelson, E.; Tovar, L.G.; Gueguen, E.; Humphries, S.; Landman, K.; Rindermann, R.S. Participatory guarantee
systems and the re-imagining of Mexico’s organic sector. Agric. Hum. Values 2015, 33, 373–388. [CrossRef]
24. Sistemas Participativos de Garantía. Una Herramienta Clave para la Soberanía Alimentaria. Available
online: http://www.redcimas.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/sistemas_participativos_
degarantia.pdf (accessed on 31 October 2018).
25. Källander, I. Participatory Guarantee Systems—PGS; Swedish Society for Nature Conservation: Stockholm,
Sweden, 2008.
26. How Participatory Guarantee Systems Can Develop and Function. Available online: https://www.ifoam.
bio/sites/default/files/page/files/pgs_guidelines_en_web.pdf (accessed on 31 October 2018).
27. IFOAM. Participatory Guarantee Systems: Shared Vision, Shared Ideals; IFOAM: Bonn, Germany, 2007.
28. Ostrom, E. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action; Cambridge University
Press: New York, NY, USA, 1990.
29. Participatory Guarantee Systems: Case Studies from Brazil, India, New Zealand, USA and France.
Available online: https://www.ifoam.bio/sites/default/files/page/files/studies_book_web.pdf (accessed
on 10 September 2018).
30. Home, R.; Bouagnimbeck, H.; Ugas, R.; Arbenz, M.; Stolze, M. Participatory guarantee systems: Organic
certification to empower farmers and strengthen communities. Agroecol. Sustain. Food Syst. 2017, 41, 526–545.
[CrossRef]
31. Nelson, E.; Gómez Tovar, L.; Schwentesius Rindermann, R.; Gómez Cruz, M.Á. Participatory organic
certification in Mexico: An alternative approach to maintaining the integrity of the organic label.
Agric. Hum. Values 2009, 27, 227–237. [CrossRef]
32. Katto-Andrighetto, J. Participatory Guarantee Systems in East Africa. Case Studies from Kenya, Tanzania and
Uganda; IFOAM: Bonn, Germany, 2013.
33. Torremocha, E. Los Sistemas Participativos de Garantía. Herramienta para la Definición de Estrategias
Agroecológicas. Master’s Thesis, Internationa University of Andalusia, Seville, Spain, 2012.
34. Sacchi, G.; Caputo, V.; Nayga, R. Alternative Labeling Programs and Purchasing Behavior toward Organic
Foods: The Case of the Participatory Guarantee Systems in Brazil. Sustainability 2015, 7, 7397–7416. [CrossRef]
35. Rover, O.; de Gennaro, B.; Roselli, L. Social Innovation and Sustainable Rural Development: The Case of a
Brazilian Agroecology Network. Sustainability 2016, 9, 3. [CrossRef]
36. Flaten, O.; Lien, G.; Koesling, M.; Loes, A.K. Norwegian farmers ceasing certified organic production:
Characteristics and reasons. J. Environ. Manag. 2010, 91, 2717–2726. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. MAPAMA. Agricultura Ecológica: Estadísticas 2015. Available online: http://www.mapama.gob.es/es/
alimentacion/temas/la-agricultura-ecologica/estadisticaseco2015connipoymetadatos_tcm7-435957.pdf
(accessed on 12 June 2017).
38. López Salcedo, P. Caracterización de la Comercialización y Distribución de Productos Ecológicos a Través de
los Canales de Venta Especializados. Available online: http://www.mapama.gob.es/es/alimentacion/
temas/la-agricultura-ecologica/estudiocaracterizacioncomercializacioncanalesventaespecializados_tcm7-
387574.pdf (accessed on 24 May 2017).
39. Proceso de Construcción y Regulación de un Sistema Participativo de Garantía para la Producción
Ecológica en Andalucía. Available online: https://repera.files.wordpress.com/2009/08/sistema_garantia_
participativa_andalucia.pdf (accessed on 31 October 2018).
40. Boza Martínez, S. La Agricultura Ecológica como Parte de la Estrategia de Desarrollo Rural Sostenible en
Andalucía. Ph.D. Thesis, Universidad Atónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 2010.
41. Cuéllar Padilla, M.; Calle Collado, Á. Can we find solutions with people? Participatory action research with
small organic producers in Andalusia. J. Rural Stud. 2011, 27, 372–383. [CrossRef]
42. De la Cruz, C. Organizaciones, Sistemas Participativos de Garantía y Procesos Agroecológicos en Andalucía.
Ph.D. Thesis, University of Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain, 2015.
43. Ecovalle. Available online: http://ecovalle.org/ (accessed on 11 October 2016).
44. Miles, M.B.; Huberman, A.M.; Saldaña, J. Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Sourcebook; SAGE Publications:
Houston, TX, USA, 1994.
270
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
45. Kaufmann, S.; Vogl, C.R. Participatory Guarantee Systems (PGS) in Mexico: A theoretic ideal or everyday
practice? Agric. Hum. Values 2017, 35, 457–472. [CrossRef]
46. Bernard, R.H. Research Methods in Anthropology. Qualitative and Quantitave Approaches; AltaMira Press:
Lanham, MD, USA, 2006.
47. Döring, N.; Bortz, J. Forschungsmethoden und Evaluation in den Sozial- und Humanwissenschaften; Springer:
Berlin, Germany, 2016.
48. Saldaña, J. The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers; SAGE Publications: Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, 2009.
49. Bühl, A. SPSS 23—Einführung in die Moderne Datenanalyse; Pearson: Hallbergmoos, Germany, 2016.
50. Oxford Dictionary. Oxford Living Dictionary. Available online: https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/
(accessed on 12 June 2017).
51. Sense.Lab e.V. Fair, Bio, Selbstbestimmt: Das Handbuch zur Gründung einer Food-Coop; Books on Demand
GmbH: Hamburg, Germany, 2009.
52. Zitcer, A. Food Co-ops and the Paradox of Exclusivity. Antipode 2015, 47, 812–828. [CrossRef]
53. Bouagnimbeck, H. Global Comparative Study on Interaction between Social Processes and Participatory Guarantee
Systems; IFOAM: Bonn, Germany, 2014.
54. IFOAM. Organic Agriculture and Participatory Guarantee Systems: Marketing and Support for Organic Smallholders;
IFOAM: Bonn, Germany, 2006.
55. Sánchez Hernández, J.L. Redes alimentarias alternativas: Concepto, tipología y adecuación a la realidad
española. Boletín de la Asociación de Geógrafos Españoles 2009, 49, 185–207.
56. Varini, F. How governments regulate PGS and where is it taking us? Org. Stand. 2017, 171, 3–6.
57. Gentile, A. De vuelta al nido en tiempos de crisis. Los boomerang kids españoles. Revista Estudios Juventud
2010, 90, 181–203.
58. Santos Ortega, A.; Martín Martín, P. La juventud española en tiempos de crisis: Paro, vidas precarias y acción
colectiva. Sociología Trabajo 2012, 75, 93–110.
59. Alrøe, H.F.; Noe, E. What makes organic agriculture move—Protest, meaning or market? A polyocular
approach to the dynamics and governance of organic agriculture. Int. J. Agric. Resour. Gov. Ecol. 2006, 7,
5–22. [CrossRef]
60. Aportando a la Construcción de la Soberanía Alimentaria Desde la Agroecología. Available online: http:
//www.ecologiapolitica.info/?p=4848 (accessed on 31 October 2018).
61. Altieri, M.A.; Nicholls, C.I. Agroecología: Única esperanza para la soberanía alimentaria y la resiliencia
socioecológica. Agroecología 2012, 7, 65–83.
62. Rosset, P.M.; Martínez-Torres, M.E. Rural Social Movements and Agroecology: Context, Theory, and Process.
Ecol. Soc. 2012, 17. [CrossRef]
63. Gómez, F.L.; Ríos-Osorop, L.; Eschenhagen, M.L. Epistemological bases of agroecology. Agrociencia 2015, 49,
679–688.
64. Ostrom, E.; Ahn, T.K. The meaning of social capital and its links to collective action. In Handbook of Social
Capital: The Troika of Sociology, Political Science and Economics; Gert, T.S., Gunnar, L.S., Northampton, M.E.E.,
Eds.; Edward Elgar: Bloomington, IN, USA, 2008; pp. 17–35.
65. Alternative Certification and a Network Conformoty Assessment Approach. Available online: https://www.
ifoam.bio/sites/default/files/page/files/alternativecertificationandanetworkconformityassessmentapproach.
pdf (accessed on 31 October 2018).
66. Brehm, J.M.; Eisenhauer, B.W. Motivations for participating in Community Supported Agriculture and their
relationship with community attachment and social capital. South. Rural Sociol. 2008, 23, 94–115.
67. Brown, C.; Miller, S. The Impacts of Local Markets: A Review of Research on Farmers Markets and
Community Supported Agriculture (CSA). Am. J. Agric. Econ. 2008, 90, 1296–1302. [CrossRef]
68. Zanasi, C.; Venturi, P.; Setti, M.; Rota, C. Participative organic certification, trust and local rural communities
development: The Case of Rede Ecovida. New Med. 2009, 2, 56–64.
69. Papaoikonomou, E.; Ginieis, M. Putting the farmer’s face on food: Governance and the producer–consumer
relationship in local food systems. Agric. Hum. Values 2016, 34, 53–67. [CrossRef]
70. Bougherara, D.; Grolleau, G.; Mzoughi, N. Buy local, pollute less: What drives households to join a
community supported farm? Ecol. Econ. 2009, 68, 1488–1495. [CrossRef]
71. Pole, A.; Gray, M. Farming alone? What’s up with the “C” in community supported agriculture. Agric. Hum.
Values 2012, 30, 85–100. [CrossRef]
271
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4081
72. Thorsøe, M.H. Maintaining Trust and Credibility in a Continuously Evolving Organic Food System. J. Agric.
Environ. Ethics 2015, 28, 767–787. [CrossRef]
73. United States Department of Agriculture. USDA National Organic Program: Who Needs to Be Cetified?
Available online: https://www.ams.usda.gov/sites/default/files/media/who_needs_to_be_certified.pdf
(accessed on 18 May 2017).
74. IFOAM. Internal Control Systems (ICS) for Group Certification. Available online: http://www.ifoam.bio/
en/internal-control-systems-ics-group-certification (accessed on 17 October 2016).
75. Hernandez, S. Striving for Control: Democracy and Oligarchy at a Mexican Cooperative. Econ. Ind. Democr.
2006, 27, 105–135. [CrossRef]
76. Österberg, P.; Nilsson, J. Members’ perception of their participation in the governance of cooperatives:
The key to trust and commitment in agricultural cooperatives. Agribusiness 2009, 25, 181–197. [CrossRef]
77. Gunn, C.E. Workers’ Self-Management; Cornell University Press: Ithaca, NY, USA, 1984.
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
272
sustainability
Article
Scaling-Up Sustainable Development Initiatives:
A Comparative Case Study of Agri-Food System
Innovations in Brazil, New York, and Senegal
Rositsa T. Ilieva 1,2,* and Andreas Hernandez 3
1 CUNY Urban Food Policy Institute, CUNY Graduate School of Public Health and Health Policy,
City University of New York, New York, NY 10027, USA
2 Parsons School of Design, The New School, New York, NY 10011, USA
3 Department of International Studies, Marymount Manhattan College, New York, NY 10021, USA;
ahernandez2@mmm.edu
* Correspondence: Rositsa.Ilieva@sph.cuny.edu
Received: 2 October 2018; Accepted: 29 October 2018; Published: 6 November 2018
	

Abstract: To effectively address the sustainability crises our planet faces, decision-makers at
different levels of government worldwide will have to get a handle on three key challenges:
learning from Global North and South initiatives in tandem, taking stock of social innovations
alongside technological fixes, and nurturing grassroots sustainable development initiatives next
to, or in place of, top-down corporate and government interventions. Current scientific literature
and grant-making institutions have often reinforced the compartmentalized fashion in which we
learn and draw policy lessons from North/South, social/technical, and bottom-up/top-down
sustainability initiatives, including local food system innovations. The strategic levers for global
sustainable development lying in-between are thus left out. This paper uses exploratory, multiple
case study analysis to address this omission. By concurrently drawing lessons from grassroots
innovations in Brazil, New York, and Senegal—three profoundly different socioeconomic and
geographic contexts—we identify common pressure points that have enabled local communities to
drive system-wide transformations toward climate adaptation, resilience, and sustainability in the
agri-food system. The findings of this paper would be of value to scholars, government officials,
and community groups engaged in agri-food systems sustainability and interested in the processes
of change that have allowed budding innovations to stabilize and scale up.
Keywords: sustainable development; alternative agri-food networks; transition theories; grassroots
innovations; socio-technical systems; agroecology; ecovillages; social movements
1. Introduction
Why can some grassroots sustainable development projects scale-up and others cannot?
Sustainability transitions are difficult as socio-technical systems like energy, transport, housing,
and agri-food are stabilized by lock-in mechanisms that relate to sunk investments, behavioral
patterns, vested interests, infrastructure, subsidies, and regulations. Sustainability transitions imply
the transformation of these wider technical, social, and economic systems and occur through the
emergence, alignment, and scaling up of radical socio-technical innovations.
This research seeks to shed light on the multi-level factors that contribute to the effective
scaling up of grassroots sustainable development projects. Our goal is to identify possible transition
“pressure points” at multiple levels of community food systems and in multiple sociotechnical
domains that may be used to support and guide the effective scaling up of sustainable development
initiatives within complex, nonlinear social and technical systems. The aim of this paper is thus
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057; doi:10.3390/su10114057 273 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
to provide theoretically-informed practical recommendations for policymakers seeking to steer
community-based sustainability transitions and reform food system governance through, rather
than despite of, grassroots innovations. To effectively navigate the sustainability crises our planet
faces, decision-makers at different levels of government worldwide will have to get a handle on
three key challenges: learning from Global North and South initiatives in tandem, taking stock of
social innovations alongside technological fixes, and nurturing grassroots sustainable development
initiatives next to, or in place of, top-down corporate and government projects and interventions.
Socio-technical transition studies focusing on community-driven transitions are still limited.
There is, however, a growing body of work focusing on “grassroots innovations” and their contribution
to different facets of sustainable development [1–6]. To transition the dominant agri-food regime—and
dismantle the unjust [7–9], unhealthy [10–12], and inefficient [13,14] systems producing hunger,
chronic diet-related diseases, environmental degradation, inhumane treatment of animals, and unfair
labor practices—top-down approaches would hardly suffice or even be appropriate. Who should be
in charge of sustainable development transitions is, thus, a question in need of urgent investigation.
Unsolved dilemmas regarding the role of different societal domains—government, market, civil society,
and all intermediary organizations in between—as well as the relationships between efforts to scale
up sustainability innovations in Global North and South countries warrant new approaches to the
study of grassroots innovations.
To fill this gap in current sustainability research, we undertake a comparative case study,
exploring grassroots sustainable development efforts from the Global North and Global South that
are transforming wider technical, social, and economic systems. The first case we examine is the
Brazilian Landless Movement’s (MST) transition to agroecology (ecologically informed sustainable
agriculture) focused in the south of Brazil. A group of MST cooperatives have developed one of the
most extensive systems of agroecological production globally. The second case we present is the New
York City’s food movement—a vast and heterogeneous movement of movements which, over the past
two decades has advocated for food justice, health equity, environmental sustainability, and fairer
labor practices throughout the urban food environment and the food chain more broadly. Lastly, in our
third case, we focus on the Ecovillage Movement of Senegal, which is constructing alternative forms
of grassroots sustainable development by drawing from West African village life and new green
technologies, along with the recuperation of soils.
There has been significant work examining grassroots agri-food movements, global networking
and organization, and resistance (see, for example, References [15–18]). There is a necessity for research
that seeks to understand the successes and challenges in grassroots agri-food movements in scaling
up. This comparative analysis of grassroots sustainable development initiatives calls attention to the
coevolution of the different niche, regime, and landscape pressures, and the shared transition levels
in each case. We identify crosscutting themes that point to important dimensions of sustainability
transitions in each case. We conclude with a systematic summary of the main lessons learnt and outline
a set of key recommendations for government officials and policymakers who wish to synergize and
scale the innovations emerging from grassroots social movements.
2. Research Methods
2.1. Theoretical Framework
Radical transformations of systems of provision—such as food, water, and transportation—are
best understood as the outcome of both social and technological innovations. Neither engineers alone
nor policymakers or non-expert citizens can singlehandedly shift complex matrixes of infrastructures
to a more equitable or sustainable regime of operation. Rather, it is the concurrent interplay,
and alignment, of changes in multiple societal domains that can, under certain circumstances,
bring about radical system transformation. Technological innovation examples, such as cellular
phones and personal computers, are well known, as are social innovations such as microcredit loans,
274
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
sharing economies, community-owned renewables, and food cooperatives. We argue that both social
and technological innovations are fundamentally socio-technical, and that this view is essential if we
are to guide, rather than simply react to, socio-technical transitions in the near future.
However, what helps innovations endure, scale up, and transform mainstream institutions,
infrastructures, and social norms? Transition theories such as the multi-level perspective (MLP) [19–21]
provide some cues into that. The strength of this perspective lies, in fact, in the integration of social and
technical understandings of sustainability transitions and the emphasis on multiple levels of stability,
or path-dependency, of a socio-technical system. In brief, according to the MLP, socio-technical regimes,
which are locked in and stabilized through mainstream infrastructures and institutions, can change
when there is an alignment between a disruption (e.g., climate change, peak oil, obesity, economic
recession) in the landscape, the highest level of system stability, and the level of niches of grassroots
innovations which offer solutions to such disruptions and a promise for a reinstated stability.
The MLP has its roots in science, technology, and society studies [22] and evolutionary
economics [23], and has been widely adopted to theorize historical transitions and the upsurge
of nineteenth and twentieth-century innovations, such as steam ships [19], sewer systems [24],
digital computers [25], and rock ‘n’ roll music [26], to mention a few, but also more recent
cases of innovative municipal waste management [27], renewable energy [28], alternative food
networks [29], and low-carbon transportation [30]. Drawing from the rich literature of historical
case studies, contemporary theorists of sociotechnical transitions have also used the MLP to devise
intervention-oriented theoretical frameworks, such as transition management [31–33], focusing on the
governance of transition processes, and strategic niche management [34,35], offering insights into the
distinct internal characteristics that successful niche innovations exhibit.
Yet the MLP, and its companion management frameworks, has also been faced with criticisms [36].
Close observers of grassroots innovations and social movements argue that current transition theories
are limited in their ability to comprehend the full range of action of grassroots sustainability initiatives.
Scholars caution that the focus of strategic niche management on novelty limits the ability to capture the
scope of civil society action [37], that niche theory is not able to adequately explain the transformational
power of social movements, and that this framework must take on a more critical capacity [1]. In fact,
application of the growth-oriented approach of strategic niche management to grassroots innovations
may not be able to encompass the complexity of diverse and conflicted realities on the ground [38].
Additionally, analyses of community currencies [39] reveal that grassroot innovations diffuse differently
from conventional innovations, and that the MLP and niche theories require adaptation for this context.
To counter some of these limitations, we extend the MLP framework by embedding it in a spatially
informed understanding of political economy, while simultaneously focusing on the agency of the
collectivities constructing sustainable development initiatives.
2.2. Data Collection and Analysis
We utilize qualitative data collection and analysis research methods to gain an in-depth
understanding of each case and conduct a comparative analysis. We conceived each of the cases as
exploratory case study [40]. The MST and Senegalese Ecovillage Movement cases rely on ethnographic
research including visual ethnography, photo-elicitation techniques, filming, and participant observation.
The New York City food movement case relies primarily on secondary data sources and the analysis of
peer-reviewed articles, government reports, and policy evaluations by nongovernmental organizations.
Unstructured interviews with academic experts, government officials, and practitioners provided
further insights into the key issues and turning points in each transition process. The extended MLP
framework guided the transition analyses and thematic coding and analysis methods were used to
identify shared themes across the cases. The final set of themes, or transition levers, were identified
through discussion between the two authors and comparison of intermediate findings on each of the
three cases.
275
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
3. Cases Overview
3.1. MST Agroecological Cooperatives
From its modest roots in Southern Brazil, the Movimento dos Trabalhadores Rurais Sem Terra
(Landless Rural Workers Movement, or MST) gradually grew into the largest nationally-based
social movement in Brazilian history and is widely recognized as the most organized, dynamic,
and influential mass movement in Latin America today [15,41–43]. Through organizing landless
families to occupy unproductive agricultural land, the MST has pressured Brazilian governments
into enacting the Constitution and redistributing more than seven million hectares of unproductive
agricultural land on which one and a half million members are now growing food [15].
The MST has developed some of the largest scale agroecological systems on the planet.
MST cooperatives have used agroecological techniques to delink from agribusiness and banks,
produce more food at a higher quality and lower cost, and recuperate their soils. Perhaps most
notably is the Grupo Gestor de Arroz (Rice Management Group) in the south of Brazil, which has created
several intertwined cooperatives bringing together 501 families, across 16 municipalities, who are
cultivating rice using diverse agroecological methods. The democratically owned and managed Grupo
Gestor stores, processes, packages, and markets an estimated 500,000 sacks of rice per year, over 5513
hectares in several regions of the state of Rio Grande do Sul. In addition to internal organization
(including building large scale food processing plants), at the core of the scaling up of the Grupo Gestor
has been the construction on institutional markets, which the Movement has worked to create at every
scale through agreements and through policy. The Grupo Gestor provides 1000’s of livelihoods and
provides food for families, the region, government institutions around the country, and for global
export. They have built a large scale, horizontal, and democratic food system, demonstrating that
agroecological methods are an effective option for peasant farmers to stay on the land and feed their
regions. While there are numerous agroecological settlements and cooperatives in the MST, here we
focus on the Grupo Gestor in the context of the wider Movement.
3.2. New York City Food Movement
The New York City food movement is a vast and heterogeneous movement of movements which,
over the past two decades has advocated for food justice, health equity, environmental sustainability,
and fairer labor practices throughout the urban food environment and the food chain more broadly.
While the city’s food system is far from having radically transitioned to sustainability, it has effectively
been reconfigured, both in institutional and physical infrastructure terms. Today, New York City
has a dedicated Office of the Director of Food Policy, has released over twenty different reports on
food policy-related matters [44], issues yearly food metrics reports, and has made the right to free
lunch accessible to all public-school students in the city. The city has also witnessed the scaling up of
many innovations in its local food system: it has more than 900 food producing gardens, over a dozen
rooftop farms, more than 140 farmers markets of which more than half are located in high-poverty
neighborhoods, a pilot curbside food scraps collection program already reaching over one million
people, a network of more than one thousand upstate farmers engaged in sustainable watershed
management practices, and a regional food hub supporting local food producers.
3.3. Senegalese Ecovillage Movement
The Senegalese Ecovillage Movement brings together hundreds of villages in a heterogenous
network that seeks community-led development by taking the best of West African village life and
combining this with green technologies and recuperation of soils and forests. Movement leaders assert
they have flipped the Northern ecovillage model on its head, saying that West African villages already
have strong community, cooperation, and spiritual systems that link them to nature, but that they
need green technologies. The Movement began in the traditional fishing village of Yoff in coalition
with the Ithaca Ecovillage and the third international EcoCity Conference which was held there in 1995.
276
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
Through the internal successes of what became EcoYoff, the ecovillage framework began to spread
organically to villages in ecologically diverse regions of Senegal. Government officials, including a
President, took note in the early 2000’s and launched the Ministry of Ecovillages, which later became the
National Agency for Ecovillages (ANEV) with the project of transitioning half of the country’s 28,000
villages into ecovillages. With this institutionalization, funds from the UNDP and other international
donors became available, creating a split in the Movement. The complex network now has a wing
linked to the government and a wing focused on grassroots community-led development (although
also linked with international donors). Although the goal of 14,000 villages remains distant, hundreds
of villages are adopting aspects of the African ecovillage model, often in coalition with ANEV or
NGOs, creating one of the most successful grassroots development efforts on the continent. The model
is spreading to neighboring countries such as Mali and Democratic Republic of Congo.
Villages have developed projects as diverse as: solar power grids, extensive permaculture gardens,
biogas and solar cookers not reliant on scarce wood fuel, reforestation, reintroduction of dry crops such
as millet, and water pumps and tanks that extend growing seasons. According to the UNDP [45], in at
least one ecovillage, years of outmigration have reversed as young people return to new opportunities
in villages.
4. Results
The cross-case thematic analysis of the three case studies led to the identification of eleven main
crosscutting themes, which we argue offer insights into possible levers for socio-technical transitions
to sustainability.
4.1. Environmental Pressure and Drive
Each of these cases is responding to very real environmental pressures that disrupt established
forms of production, distribution and consumption in the agri-food system. It is in relationship to
these environmental pressures, that the movements began to, in part, redefine their understandings
and practices in the food system.
MST (Landless Rural Workers Movement): Most farmers and settlements transitioned to
agroecology in great part as they were not able to produce on highly-degraded land, which was
redistributed through the state and federal government. This was coupled with health complications
from pesticide use (especially among children and those in the fields), the high costs of purchasing
chemical inputs, as well as the high cost of interest through public and private banks. These dynamics
conditioned settlements to look for alternatives to improve soil health and intensify soil capacity.
Through trial and error, they began practicing a constellation of soil intensification techniques using
materials available on their settlement, such as animal and crop rotation, organic inputs, and ground
covers, to build their soil’s capacities. These agroecological techniques recuperated degraded soils
while delinking with expensive chemical inputs, and farmers report improved health conditions.
NYCFM (New York City Food Movement): Social justice and environmental concerns,
rather than economic development motifs, have been at the heart of most threads of the food movement
in New York City as well. Derelict and dilapidated urban spaces in the late 1970s triggered community
groups organizing to convert them in quality green spaces. Most recently, the deepening health
inequalities between New Yorkers of different socioeconomic statuses have also been a central driver for
food justice activism and community food system innovations such as affordable community supported
agriculture (CSAs) (e.g., Corbin Hill Food Project) and youth-run farmers markets. Additionally, the
urban agriculture movement has gained further support in the aftermath of extreme weather events,
such as Hurricane Sandy in 2011, and risks of flooding and environmental degradation.
SEM (Senegalese Ecovillage Movement): Villages face dire environmental conditions, which are
intertwined with difficult social conditions. In the north of the country, the Sahara is arriving
where forests existed 60 years ago. Deforestation by colonial powers, villages, and companies
have left impoverished landscapes. Organizations such as USAID and the Chinese Government have
277
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
advocated and subsidized chemical and water intensive rice production to sell nationally and for
export, poisoning rivers and mining soils. This constellation of factors has impoverished villages and
contributed to hunger, outmigration, and social breakdown. A key dynamic of successful ecovillages
has been recuperating the local environments on which they rely, particularly through improving and
intensifying soils and through reforestation.
4.2. Reframing Innovations as Political Tools
A key tenet in the MLP on transitions is that regime actors perceive the radical niches of innovation
as advantageous and consequently take action to transform current institutions and practices. This need
for compatibility between mainstream and innovative practices poses a paradox, but is also a key
pressure point for transforming entrenched sociotechnical systems such as energy, food, and housing.
Successful transition initiatives in each of the three cases examined have been able to take advantage
of this by effectively reframing the social benefits (or the challenge) their innovation is a means
to addressing.
MST: The MST has challenged the assumption that large-scale, chemically-intensive industrial
agriculture is the only, or the most efficient, way to feed the world, and that the peasant farmer is
outmoded. Through their practice, they posit that the peasant farmer is the best steward of the land for
intergenerational use, and that agroecological cooperatives, such as the Grupo Gestor, can provide high
quality, low cost food for their regions, provide livelihoods, and recuperate the earth. Agroecological
methods are referred to as technologies that intensify soil, social, and political capacities. The MST has
reframed agroecology as a political tool for peasants to stay in the countryside. HannahWittman [46]
has theorized the MST project as agrarian citizenship, in which “political participation, local food
production, and environmental stewardship redefine the ongoing constitution of the relationship
between land, state, and rural society”.
NYCFM: Many of the successes of the New York City food movement are attributable to
the timely and effective reframing of the key issue at stake and how it links to the highest
priorities on the mayoral agenda. Examples include the reframing of urban agriculture as a
tool for social justice [47], environmental and nutrition education, and green infrastructure for
climate resiliency; the re-envisioning of farmers markets as a tool for community development
and public health; and sustainable regional farming as a tool for safeguarding the city’s drinking
water. The reconceptualization of food as an urban system and of food justice goals as part of the
responsibilities of local government are arguably two of the most consequential shifts in local political
discourse over the past decade and a half.
SEM: This Movement has reframed the notion of ecovillages coming from the Global North,
and in the process also reframed ideas of West African rural development. The Movement seeks
community-led development by taking the best ofWest African village life and combining this with
green technologies and the recuperation of soils and forests. Movement leaders assert that Northern
ecovillages are often focused on creating community and ecologically viable worldviews and spiritual
systems. African villages, they argue, already possess these social and cultural resources, and seek
to bring in “clean modern technologies to uplift living conditions” (interview with Ousmane Pame,
July 2016) while recuperating the environments upon which villages depend. Leaders report that the
holistic framework of ecovillages is highly resonant with West African traditional worldviews and
provides an effective tool for development that respects traditional village culture while opening to
the world and introducing technology.
4.3. Openness to Experimentation
Transitions are complex, coevolutionary processes defying any attempt to plan and implement
them in a linear fashion. Successful grassroots innovations and movements, as those discussed
in this paper, have been able to circumvent this challenge by remaining open to new ideas and
278
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
experimentation and timely making adjustments in response to changing socioeconomic and political
conditions, or internal struggles.
MST: Early in the Movement’s history, MST leadership implemented cooperatives based on
the Cuban model of agricultural modernization, cultivating monocultures with investment into
machinery and chemical inputs. Many early settlements failed, due to high costs and increasing debt on
equipment and chemical packages, difficulties in accessing markets and credit, and soil deterioration.
A grassroots rebellion in the Movement forced the leadership to adopt more open-ended approaches,
with settlements taking initiative and following multiple pathways towards effective production and
livelihoods [15]. Through successful experiments at the settlement level, and later regional level with
the Grupo Gestor, agroecology emerged as one of the most effective new pathways and was adopted
as a pillar of the Movement in 2000. The open-endedness of agroecology itself, which proposes the
holistic engagement of constellations of social and ecological relationships, has provided a fluid and
agile tool for innovation and scaling up.
NYCFM: In New York, examples of the openness of food system entrepreneurs and policymakers
to experimentation include pilot initiatives to test different models of curbside composing,
demonstration urban farms at a public housing sites, forging new links between local farmers and
preschool centers, call centers for food and nutrition assistance benefits, and online school food
programs enrollment. Examples in the nongovernmental domain include developing alternative,
healthy school food meal deliveries (e.g., Red Rabbit), pop-up drop-off sites for food scraps
(e.g., Lower East Side Ecology Center), green jobs for youth through green roof construction,
culinary education, and urban agriculture (e.g., Green Bronx Machine [48]), youth-managed farmers
markets (e.g., GrowNYC Youthmarkets), and the conversion of industrial buildings’ rooftops into
food-producing farms (e.g., Eagle Street Rooftop Farm, Brooklyn Grange, Gotham Greens).
SEM: The ecovillage framework was initially adopted by a village being surrounded and
subsumed by Dakar, which had been sprawling since at least the 1970s, to defend livelihood and
culture. This framework set the foundations for innovative responses, outside of both traditional
village modalities as well as mainline development pathways. Village leaders express how the
ecovillage model provides a framework to engage the interrelations of culture, economy, technology,
and environment, to promote materially and culturally better ways of living over the long term.
The ecovillage framework they say is not prescriptive but orients innovative approaches to protracted
problems. For example, the ongoing issue of food insecurity is being addressed the village of
Mbackombel through installing solar powered microgrids. Among numerous other benefits, this grid
powers pumps to store water, and thus expands the growing season, and creates new permaculture
gardens, reforestation, and fish ponds. It also frees up young girls charged with getting water to go
to school.
4.4. Partnerships and Coalition Building
Coalition building is essential for the alignment and scaling up of niches of innovation.
Links between participants with different powers and roles across government and market institutions
are also key for the translation of niches’ value in terms that can be seen as advantageous by mainstream
actors in the socio-technical system.
MST: MST settlements, and the Movement as a whole, realized early on that they needed
partnerships to survive politically and physically; as a movement they needed to challenge existing
patterns of private property with direct links to the colonial era. The development of the agroecological
systems of the Grupo Gestor has been accomplished through partnerships with universities, agronomists,
religious organizations, and other organic farmers, among others. Beyond this, creating new markets
required partnerships with city and state governments, other social movements, and technical support.
The MST was a founding member of the global network Via Campesina, the world’s largest social
movement. Via Campesina has transformed global debate on food and agriculture, introducing
democratic principles. Their idea of food sovereignty asserts the rights of peoples to define and
279
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
control ecologically sound food systems, rather than the demands of international commodity markets
and corporations.
NYCFM: While the food movement in New York City is effectively a movement of movements
and largely diverse and fragmented, partnerships have played an important role in both stabilizing
grassroots innovations and influencing mainstream businesses and policies. Examples of coalitions
include the NYC Community Gardens Coalition, which was key in preserving community gardens
threatened from development, the now defunct Brooklyn Food Coalition, the New York City Coalition
Against Hunger, City Harvest and its Community Action Networks, the NYC Agriculture Technology
Collective, and the New York City Food Assistance Collaborative, among others. Cross-sectoral
coalitions, such as the New York City Food and Fitness Partnership—a collaborative effort between
City Harvest, Brooklyn Rescue Mission, and Transportation Alternatives—have also been essential in
scaling up school food and food access initiatives throughout the city. New York City is also part of
the cross-city Urban School Food Alliance (established in 2012) together with Orlando, Dallas, Miami,
Los Angeles, Chicago, and Fort Lauderdale, and since 2017, Las Vegas, Philadelphia, Baltimore and
Boston as well. The Alliance has been successful in mandating antibiotic-free chicken and compostable
trays across school districts, collectively influencing more than 3 million meals and thousands of
school cafeterias.
SEM: The ecovillage movement was born out of partnership with Northern ecovillages in the
U.S. and Europe, as well as the Global Ecovillage Network. These exchanges continue, bringing
the strengths of the African and Northern experiences to bear upon each other. The Ecovillage
framework was at the center of the development of several coalition organizations, including the
Senegal Ecovillage Network, GEN Africa, and village led NGOs, such as REDES, which coordinates
the development of five regional villages. Ecovillages work with international organizations, such as
the UNDP, Gaia Education, and IFAD, as well as the National Ecovillage Agency (ANEV), which is
discussed below, making a new more engaged and effective relationship with the Senagalese state.
4.5. Building and Maintaining Autonomy
Historically, social movements have often been weakened through a mixture of cooptation and
coercion, sapping the movements of independent and creative action. Each of these three cases has
consciously fought to remain relatively autonomous, while in interaction with state, civil society,
and NGO stakeholders. Autonomy has made it possible for the movements to continue to innovate,
have policy impact, and scale up their projects.
MST: MST agroecological farmers and cooperatives, challenge the idea of growing food for money
(and export), and then using money to buy food. High costs and poor soil quality catalyzed the
development of farming methods that intensify soil with what is available on settlements, and to
delink from the high costs of chemical inputs from agribusiness (and the high cost of bank credit in
Brazil). The MST cooperatives have sought to first build their own self-sufficiency and autonomy
(soil inputs, seeds, food, etc.), before extending to build wider exchanges. They argue that this provides
independence and stability from varying macroeconomic conditions, as well as a core space of strength
in which to act within wider social and political systems. The Movement has been successful at
building capacity on the settlements, often in partnership with sympathetic organizations, to train
settlement members in areas such as accounting, machine operation, and repair, and perhaps critically,
political analysis.
NYC: As innovations scale up, one key dilemma is how to maintain their independence from the
government agencies and private companies they are trying to resist and provide an alternative to.
The recent rise of a commercial strand of the urban agriculture movement can potentially be coopted
by mainstream food businesses and community-based composting initiatives are now gradually being
“phased out” via the new city-led pilot programs. Yet, changes in mainstream practices are occurring
because the pioneer initiatives were able to be sustainable on their own first. Spaces like Farm School
280
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
NYC, kitchen incubators, and the new urban agriculture business incubator continue to provide
movement entrepreneurs with the skills and tools to build and maintain their autonomy.
SEM: The Senegal Ecovillage Network (GENSEN) was born out of the first ecovillages in the late
1990’s. This network fell apart and the movement split into two heterogenous wings as the federal
government became involved with first the Ministry of Ecovillages, and then ANEV. One part of
the Movement asserts that the community-led dimensions of ecovillage development are essential,
and direct government intervention weakens community agency, creating a situation that looks like
other government-led development efforts. The other part of the Movement insists that Government
and international aid provides access to crucial and expensive technologies (such as solar power) and
infrastructures (such as irrigation), and that villages remain agents in this relationship, participating in
decisions of what interventions or resources will be provided. The Global Ecovillage Network (GEN)
created GEN Africa, which has become the overarching and unifying organization to which most
ecovillages may relate.
4.6. Creating New Markets
The three movements found substantial barriers in the market systems in which they were situated.
Each movement worked to create new market relationships, and often value-added enterprises,
which became key infrastructures to their economic viability. Importantly, many of the new markets
were developed by cooperatives, and in some cases between cooperatives.
MST: Foundational for the scaling up for MST agroecological systems has been the creation of
institutional markets at every scale through direct agreement and through policy. Perhaps the most
notable policy has been the Food Acquisition Program (PAA), which requires municipal governments
to procure up to 30% of their food from family farms for city operations. Other institutional markets
include the military, universities, and prisons, and importantly the National Program for School Meals
(PNAE). Some cooperatives and organizations, such as the Grupo Gestor, also process and package
their own brands (rice, milk, sauces, etc.) which are available in MST stores, grocery stores, and are
exported. Farmers markets, organized in partnership with city governments and other institutions,
and with other organic farmers, have emerged as critical spaces for MST farmers to gain dignified
livelihoods by selling their production directly to consumers.
NYCFM: While far from replacing mainstream food production, procurement, retail, and disposal,
the multiple streams of food justice activism in New York City have effectively reconfigured the
marketplace. Currently, there are over 140 farmers markets, multiple links between the city’s over
900 urban gardens and farmers markets, dozens of CSAs (including Community Supported Fisheries
[CSFs]), food co-ops, farm to preschool programs, and new regional food hubs (e.g., Greenmarket
Co., Lucky Dog Food Hub) now in operation. The pilot city compost collection and recycling program
has also effectively been scaled up to now reach over one million New Yorkers. Other new businesses
related to food waste, such as the recycling of used cooking oil into biodiesel, have also changed the
local food and energy market and established themselves as viable local businesses (e.g., TriState
Biodiesel, Grease Lightning).
SEM: In many villages, recuperating soils, creating permaculture gardens, and increasing
growing seasons remains the focus, within the context of food insecurity. However, women’s groups
particularly, as they find success with permaculture methods, are able to gain increasing income.
Villager farmers are building on existing institutional markets, such as selling produce to local and
regional schools. As value added enterprises are launched (discussed below), these are also creating
new market opportunities.
4.7. Mobilization of Women’s Groups
Women’s groups played decisive roles in the three grassroots social movements. Often, it was
women or women’s groups that created key new practices and infrastructures, which supported the
movements and helped scale up movement projects.
281
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
MST: Although the Movement continues be led at the highest levels disproportionately by men,
women have organized effectively within the Movement to create greater gender balance. For example,
all elected coordinator positions from the settlement to the national level must be composed of one
man and one woman. This gender balance within the movement organization has been foundational
on the settlement level for experimenting with agroecological practices, which were often proposed
and first implemented by women who sought to protect their families from sickness and economic
hardship. One example was with the transition of a dairy operation to agroecology in the settlement
COOPAVA. The first change proposed was to treat the cows with kindness, instead of with the historic
rough treatment using dogs, horses, and whips. Women on the settlement embraced this proposal
and led the initiative. University technicians report that changing the treatment of the cows increased
milk production by 25% within one month.
NYCFM: Women and women’s groups have been a powerful driving force behind the NYC food
movement. The city’s first community garden was initiated by Liz Christy in 1973, Christine Datz
spearheaded the first community composting program and founded the Lower East Side Ecology
Center in the 1980s, Annie Novak (together with Ben Flanner) co-founded the city’s (and U.S.’s) first
commercial food producing rooftop farm in 2009; Onika Abraham directs the first urban farming
training program in the city Farm School NYC (co-founded by Ursula Chanse, Lorrie Clevenger and
others); Karen Washington founded Black Urban Growers (BUGS) and directed the NYC Community
Garden Coalition; and Linda Goode Bryant founded Project EATS—Active Citizen Project, to mention
a few. Other noteworthy women-led initiatives, which have ignited the NYCFM, include Hot Bread
Kitchen, an ethnic breads company allowing immigrant women an opportunity to start their own
businesses; La Finca del Sur, a women-led community farm in the South Bronx; the Harvest Home
farmers markets network, led by Maritza Owens; and Community Food Advocates, co-founded by
Kathy Goldman (previously founder of the Community Food Resource Center 1980–2003) and Agnes
Molnar who, together with Liz Accles, Jan Poppendieck (co-founder of the New York City Food Policy
Center and the CUNY Urban Food Policy Center and author of Free For All: Fixing School Food in
America [49]), and others, led a successful campaign for universal free school lunch in New York City.
SEM:Women and women’s groups have often led the way in transforming food production in the
ecovillages. For example, in the village of Djara, women’s groups have created extensive permaculture
gardens, providing the majority of village food, while building soil health. Each garden is a mixture of
collective and family plots. The men of the village continue with chemical and water-intensive rice
cultivation, which has had at best mixed success financially while adding to significant health problems
in the village due to significant pesticides in their only water sources. Many villagers report symptoms
of pesticide toxicity, such as joint pain and stomach problems. Women have also used the ecovillage
framework to assert women’s agency in formal village life, and in making direct relationship with
Northern ecovillages and NGO’s.
4.8. Mobilizing Public Institutions (While Maintaining Autonomy)
Each of these movements has not only affected policy but has been able to mobilize public
institutions at critical intersections. The movements, while all founded as agri-food movements,
expanded their understandings of what is required for alternative agri-food systems. In these very
diverse cases, these understandings are articulated differently, but each calls for the support of public
and private institutions to build what might be loosely termed as citizenship rights.
MST: Through occupations, advocacy, and politics, the movement has been able mobilize
the redistribution of land for almost a million members. This is less than the land reform initially
envisioned when the movement began. They have been more successful for the struggle on the land,
mobilizing city, state, and federal institutions to provide citizenship rights for settlements including
schools, healthcare, roads, electricity, and other infrastructure. Many have argued the focus on the
struggle on the land is part of what has made the MST more successful than many other landless
movements around the world. The Movement has sought (and sometimes struggled) to remain
282
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
autonomous while actively participating in formal politics. The MST was a founding force of the
Workers Party (PT), which has held power at all levels and the majority of members continue to support.
There have been numerous MST members elected to political office at local, state, and national levels.
In some regions, where settlements are concentrated, the MST has taken electoral control of rural
towns. The Movement has struggled internally with how much to push sympathetic governments
(for instance, through land occupations) and how much to work with them (building infrastructure,
new markets, etc.).
NYCFM: In December 2017, New York City passed a bill (Intro 1661-A) to create the city’s first
centralized digital hub for urban agriculture. This is just one example of how the alignment of
bottom-up innovations, in this case commercial urban agriculture companies, can mobilize institutions
to change the rules. Other examples include the expansion of the universal free lunch program,
achieved through joint efforts by nonprofit advocacy organizations, like Community Food Advocates,
and government officials like the City’s Public Advocate. Under pressure of environmental groups in
the food movement, the city also recently carried out a comprehensive food system resiliency study
(2016), which assessed its degree of disaster preparedness.
SEM: As discussed above, GENSEN was able to help create the world’s first Ministry for
Ecovillages. This achievement was recognized with the GEN meeting held in Dakar in 2014. Although
government involvement remains divisive, many villages report that they are able to mobilize financial
and technical resources from ANEV and other international organizations, while continuing to be
community determined.
4.9. Affecting and Participating in Policy
These successful movements were all able to, in different ways, begin to affect policy in ways
that then fed back into their practices to support scaling their work. These policies also served to
support transformation in consciousness of wider communities interlinked with the movements.
Critically, beyond social and political pressure, each movement was able to utilize or create ongoing
processes to propose policy and actively participate in policymaking.
MST: A key explanatory factor for the success of MST cooperatives in transitioning to, and scaling
up agroecological systems, has been their ability to affect, participate in, and create policy at municipal,
state, and federal levels. The Movement’s success is in part due to its ability to participate in building
policy that sets the stage for expanding its political and agricultural projects. The MST helped pressure
social dimensions of the 1989 Constitution, which legitimized their struggle. Perhaps most crucial in
the scaling of agroecology to regional levels has been the creation of policy for institutional markets,
guaranteeing large purchases of food from family farms, such as the Food Acquisition Program (PAA)
and the National School Food Program (PNAE). These programs that provide high quality food to
schools, hospitals, and other public institutions through government purchases were designed as
guaranteed and stable markets for agroecological cooperatives.
The Movement has worked with state governments to transform the industrial bias of agricultural
support. For example, in the State of Rio Grande do Sul, subsidies were put in place for the support of
organic and agroecological farming, including organic fertilizer, technical support, and infrastructure,
such as irrigation, and support for building local markets. The Movement also has participated in the
design of state and federal educational policy, building government-funded technical schools with
specialties in areas such as agroecology and cooperative management. The MST voice is present in
global forums through the Via Campesina and the food sovereignty perspective (see above).
NYCFM: Over the past two decades, the different strands of the New York City food movement
have been able to reconfigure part of the local food system regime through concerted and sustained
activism and coalition-building. Community groups have effectively prevented community gardens
to be sold out for development in the 1990s and, more recently, the NYC Community Gardens
Coalition saved nearly 70% of the community gardens that were threatened by affordable housing
development. Other policy changes include the Zone Green amendment incentivizing rooftop
283
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
greenhouses, the introduction of universal free lunch for all public-school students, the increase of the
minimum wage for fast food workers, the introduction of food procurement standards for city agencies,
the ban on trans fats, and the requirement for calorie and sodium labeling for chain restaurants.
Many of the successes and the expansion and scaling up of local food initiatives are attributable
to a blend of tactics that have enabled community food advocates to participate decision-making
processes. Among these are community board meetings, participatory budgeting, demonstrations,
legislative hearings chaired by City Council and the state, and electoral forums as the precedent-setting
2013 Mayoral Forum on Food Policy. Recently, food justice and food access advocates testified before
City Council on how to revise the city’s Food Retail Expansion to Support Health (FRESH) program
offering tax and zoning incentives to developers to integrate fresh and healthy food retail in designated
high-need neighborhoods.
SEM: The expansion of the Ecovillage Model has been driven both through the grassroots, as
well as through government initiatives which villages both inspired and participated in building.
Perhaps most important was the development of the Ministry of Ecovillages, following a visit of by the
Country’s President to a series of ecovillages in the late 2000s. This Ministry was set up with the task to
transition half the country’s 28,000 villages into ecovillages. A few years later, this project was moved
to a new National Ecovillage Agency (ANEV) under the environment Ministry. ANEV seeks to involve
and support the villages with development assistance that villages request. This includes interventions
such as implementing solar power, providing seeds, infrastructure for irrigation, and technical support.
The formal power structures of villages vary between elected mayors and hereditary chiefs. In both
cases, villages have taken on the ecovillage framework usually with the leadership, or at least with
the strong support of, these formal village positions. Thus, government resources are leveraged
directly towards ecovillage development at the village level, as villages make this a political focus.
Village leadership is also then able to formally interact with federal organs, particularly with ANEV.
4.10. Access to Land and Land Tenure
The three movements had different relations to land and land access. The thread weaving through
the three movement histories is that questions of land tenure were political from the beginning.
Whether through occupations, or in defense of traditional lands, the movements encountered powerful
resistance, often by some of the most powerful segments of their societies, to establishing their
agricultural practices.
MST: The MST was born through the desire of farmers displaced by the Green Revolution and
Military Government to gain land tenure. The Movement continues to pressure governments through
advocacy, occupations, and politics to fulfill the constitutional mandate to redistribute unproductive
land, as well as to provide citizenship rights on the settlements, such as education, roads, electricity,
and healthcare. The main tool has been to occupy unproductive land as a kind of rural strike to force
the federal government to fulfill the constitutional mandate.
NYCFM: Community gardens are often under pressure from more lucrative commercial and
residential land uses. While the market overwhelmingly favors built-up spaces, the NYC food
movement has been successful in institutionalizing a formal Garden Review Process (since 2010)
that requires developers and the city to seek alternative sites for the relocation of existing
community gardens (The Rules of the City of New York, Title 56, Chapter 6–05). Most importantly,
several community-led land trust groups like the Brooklyn Queens Land Trust (which helped prevent
over 120 gardens from being auctioned in the 1990s), the Bronx Land Trust, and the Manhattan Land
Trust have been essential in helping urban gardeners stay on the land. The City’s Green Thumb
program and the nonprofit 596 Acres (which ceased operations in Summer 2018, after seven years
of sustained advocacy) have also been playing a central role in facilitating access to public land and
scaling up community food system initiatives.
SEM: The Movement began in part as resistance to land grabbing by public and private entities
as Dakar expanded to encircle and subsume traditional villages. Farther away from urban centers,
284
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
most villages have access to lands, but are often historically degraded by deforestation, poor farming
practices, and overgrazing.
5. Discussion
The results of this paper confirm and extend existing theories of socio-technical transitions in three
main ways. First, the manifold set of levers, or pressure points, uncovered through the comparative
analysis corroborates the hypothesis that radical system-wide transitions occur when a rich and diverse
set of strategies are deployed, and transition champions engage with the concurrent transformation of
different segments of the mainstream regime—markets, government policies, physical infrastructures,
and social norms and practices [19]—through multiple, sustained reiterations in time.
Second, it also echoes prior findings on the importance of the interplay between different levels
of power—relational, dispositional, and structural [50]—in sociotechnical transitions. According to
MLP theorists [51], niche innovators spur system transformation by leveraging their relational powers
stemming from their connectedness and unity with other grassroots entrepreneurs while regime
players, in turn, bring about (or resist) change through their dispositional powers by using existing
legislative and regulatory mechanisms. Finally, landscapes, or the aggregate of niche and regime
groups, and the economic, ideological, and environmental settings they operate in are used to
collectively entrench (or disrupt) existing systems through their structural powers. As our cases reveal,
strong networks of grassroots innovators can, thus, mobilize mainstream institutions and businesses to
use their dispositional powers and change formal rules and policies, which, in turn, can upset mainstay
beliefs and conventions of what is, or should be, normal.
Third, the analysis of the three cases also reconfirmed the already known paradox [29] in transition
processes, or the need for radical niche innovations to exhibit some degree of compatibility with the
dominant systems and sociotechnical regimes that seek to overturn or reconfigure. In fact, building and
maintaining autonomy is a key trait of successful sustainability innovations, but even more so the
ability to mobilize existing institutions while maintaining autonomy.
One of the limitations of the research presented in this paper is that, while drawing on a markedly
diverse and rich set of cases, we cannot make the claim that our findings are generalizable beyond
the three cases analyzed. This was a purposefully qualitative, exploratory case study that afforded
an in-depth examination of emerging themes and shared traits across three cases, yet these findings
remain grounded in the specific study settings we chose to study. An additional caveat is that agri-food
systems are socio-technical and inherently complex and dynamic, and so even local policymakers
and activists seeking to apply the findings from this paper need to proceed with caution. The systems
that yielded those findings may well no longer exist—coalitions disband and reform, values may shift,
and technologies are rapidly morphing into new infrastructures and services. Yet, while developing
a universal theory of scaling up niche innovations was beyond the scope of this paper, this does
not preclude the possibility that the findings and recommendations we put forward are relevant for,
or applicable to, current circumstances or geopolitical contexts other than those we examined.
Future research would benefit from delving deeper into questions about the role of political
entrepreneurs in steering niche innovations, the relationship between different streams of funding
and the trajectories and longevity of sustainable development initiatives, as well as the tactics that
transformative niches of innovations use to cope with failure and seemingly intractable challenges as
they seek to transform entrenched systems of production and consumption. An overt examination of
the possible downsides of scaling up grassroots innovations or connecting them would also afford
a clearer understanding of the possible limitations of approaches seeking to replicate and normalize
place-based solutions.
6. Conclusions: Pressure Points and Policy Recommendations
To effectively address the sustainability crises our planet faces, including those stemming
from a behemoth yet fragile global agri-food system, we have suggested that it is necessary for
285
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
decision-makers at different levels of government worldwide to engage three challenges: learning from
Global North and South initiatives in tandem, taking stock of social innovations alongside technological
fixes, and nurturing grassroots sustainable development initiatives next to, or in place of, top-down
corporate and government projects and interventions. In this research we sought to address the
question of what key pressure points for guiding socio-technical transitions to sustainability exist
and what is the scope for learning from success cases from Global North and Global South countries
in tandem. We addressed these questions by exploring the accomplishments of three distinct social
movements: the Senegalese ecovillage movement, MST agroecological cooperatives, and the New
York City food movement. Our findings reveal that the successes of those movements in reconfiguring
dominant systems of production and consumption lie in a rich amalgam of factors, which all point to the
importance of movement’s “soft skills” and the ability to build robust social infrastructures alongside
transformations of the physical environment. Specifically, among these skills are the movement’s
ability to:
• reframe the key issues at stake;
• remain open to experimentation;
• forge diverse cross-sectoral partnerships and coalitions;
• amass political support and affect policy;
• create self-sustaining new markets;
• nurture and encourage women leadership;
• secure access to land and land tenure;
• build and maintain autonomy from mainstream systems and institutions;
• mobilize public institutions to change rules and practices;
• be actively engaged and participate in policymaking processes.
Policy Recommendations
Based on the findings from our cross-case analyses, we offer a set of recommendations for
government decision-makers at all scales interested using pressure points to steer socio-technical
transitions to sustainability. The emphasis on steering and pressure points over command and control
and execution of blueprints is key in that contemporary societies, and the systems of provision
they rely on, such as the agri-food system, are increasingly complex and tend to evolve rapidly in
a nonlinear fashion. Thus, while comprehensive plans, targets, and indicators are essential tools in
planning for local and global sustainability, implementation relying on 20th-century theories of change
is unlikely to succeed.
An agile planning and implementation, acknowledging the impossibility to have complete
information about the systems we seek to transform and their complexity, is therefore a more
promising and, in light of the findings of this paper, we argue, necessary approach. Further, to make
global sustainability targets and indicators meaningful to local administrations as diverse as the
ones we explored in this paper, a granular understanding of the levers (and barriers) that have
accompanied agri-food transitions already underway is warranted. Our analysis of sustainability
innovations in Brazil, New York, and Senegal revealed a series of pressure points that local actors
have acted on in seeking transformative change and durable transitions to healthier, more equitable,
and environmentally sound systems and communities. We suggest that future sustainability planning
and implementation will thus benefit from grounding action in emergent evidence of what bundles
of actions work here and now in addition to, or despite of, institutionalized rules and practices,
which often become obsolete by the time a plan gets to the stage of implementation. In particular,
we suggest that governments consider the five strategies listed below, with the caveat that they are
conceivable only if existing norms, expectations, and institutions change as well:
286
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
1. Where resources are scarce, governments, instead of continuing a path-dependent momentum,
should support movement innovation and alternatives, which are embedded and responding to
local physical and cultural geographies;
2. Include innovative movements in debate and policy making and support movement-led policy
that builds new movement capacity and innovation.
3. Support movement autonomy, through supporting conditions for self-sufficiency. By investing
first in movement self-sufficiency, this provides a foundation to nurture or strengthen innovations;
4. Support movement value-added ventures, even if value-added alternatives challenge regulations
or path dependencies of the present system;
5. Support the design of flexible, territorially-sensitive policies and plans. Rigidity of policies and
indicator frameworks, both local and global, is one of the most frequent reasons for their failure
and even rejection by local communities.
Yet, while these five strategies were key in scaling up the grassroots innovations we investigated,
it would be naive to suggest that local governments can pursue them in the absence of conducive
institutions. New political spaces [52] and creative bureaucrats [53,54] open to working at the margins
of routinized practices and comfortable collaborations are core prerequisites for engaging with any of
these tactics. Organizational innovations, such as the Ministry for Ecovillages in Senegal or the Office
of the Director of Food Policy in New York, are two among many other examples of the importance of
nonconventional spaces and leaders within existing regimes for scaling up grassroots innovations.
Ultimately, our research reveals that grassroots sustainable development initiatives are advancing
some of the most creative system-wide transformations and transitions toward climate adaptation,
resilience, and sustainability in the agri-food system. While not universal, and contingent upon
foresighted, open-minded governments, we suggest that these five broad strategies, implemented
with the participation of grassroots social movements, and embedded in local social and ecological
conditions, may help catalyze the creative innovations needed to create socially and ecologically
resilient and sustainable forms of collective life.
Author Contributions: Both authors contributed to the conceptualization and writing of this manuscript and the
ideas it contains.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: We are deeply thankful for the time and energies given by members and allies of the Brazilian
Landless Movement, New York City Food Movement, and the Senegalese Ecovillage Movement. Without their
openness and interest in the critical investigation of their projects, this research would not have been possible.
We are also grateful for the valuable insights and constructive feedback provided by the three anonymous
reviewers on earlier versions of the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Smith, A.; Seyfang, G. Constructing grassroots innovations for sustainability. Glob. Environ. Chang. 2013, 23,
827–829. [CrossRef]
2. Hielscher, S.; Seyfang, G.; Smith, A. Grassroots innovations for sustainable energy: Exploring
niche-development processes among community-energy initiatives. In Innovations in Sustainable Consumption:
New Economics, Socio-Technical Transitions and Social Practices; Cohen, M.J., Szejnwald Brown, H.,
Vergragt, P.J., Eds.; Edward Elgar: Cheltenham/Northampton, UK, 2013; pp. 133–158.
3. Monaghan, A. Conceptual niche management of grassroots innovation for sustainability: The case of body
disposal practices in the UK. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2009, 76, 1026–1043. [CrossRef]
4. Feola, G.; Nunes, R. Success and failure of grassroots innovations for addressing climate change: The case of
the Transition Movement. Glob. Environ. Chang. 2014, 24, 232–250. [CrossRef]
5. Seyfang, G.; Haxeltine, A. Growing grassroots innovations: Exploring the role of community-based initiatives
in governing sustainable energy transitions. Environ. Plan. C Gov. Policy 2012, 30, 381–400. [CrossRef]
287
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
6. Kirwan, J.; Ilbery, B.; Maye, D.; Carey, J. Grassroots social innovations and food localisation: An investigation
of the Local Food programme in England. Glob. Environ. Chang. 2013, 23, 830–837. [CrossRef]
7. Cultivating Food Justice: Race, Class, and Sustainability; Alkon, A.H., Agyeman, J., Eds.; MIT Press: Boston,
MA, USA, 2011; ISBN 0262016265.
8. Broad, G. More Than Just Food; University of California Press: Oakland, CA, USA, 2016.
9. Allen, P. Mining for justice in the food system: Perceptions, practices, and possibilities. Agric. Hum. Values
2008, 25, 157–161. [CrossRef]
10. Feng, J.; Glass, T.A.; Curriero, F.C.; Stewart, W.F.; Schwartz, B.S. The built environment and obesity:
A systematic review of the epidemiologic evidence. Health Place 2010, 16, 175–190. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Lee, H. The role of local food availability in explaining obesity risk among young school-aged children.
Soc. Sci. Med. 2012, 74, 1193–1203. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Pan, L.; Sherry, B.; Njai, R.; Blanck, H.M. Food insecurity is associated with obesity among US adults in 12
states. J. Acad. Nutr. Diet. 2012, 112, 1403–1409. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Robertson, G.P. Greenhouse Gases in Intensive Agriculture: Contributions of Individual Gases to the
Radiative Forcing of the Atmosphere. Science 2000, 289, 1922–1925. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Garnett, T. Where are the best opportunities for reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the food system
(including the food chain)? Food Policy 2011, 36, S23–S32. [CrossRef]
15. Karriem, A. The rise and transformation of the Brazilian landless movement into a counter-hegemonic
political actor: A Gramscian analysis. Geoforum 2009, 40, 316–325. [CrossRef]
16. Wittman, H. Reworking the metabolic rift: La Vía Campesina, agrarian citizenship, and food sovereignty.
J. Peasant Stud. 2009, 36, 805–826. [CrossRef]
17. Holt Giménez, E.; Shattuck, A. Food crises, food regimes and food movements: Rumblings of reform or tides
of transformation? J. Peasant Stud. 2011, 38, 109–144. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Patel, R. Stuffed and Starved: The Hidden Battle for the World Food System; Melville House Pub: Brooklyn, NY,
USA, 2012; ISBN 1612191274.
19. Geels, F.W. Technological transitions as evolutionary reconfiguration processes: A multi-level perspective
and a case-study. Res. Policy 2002, 31, 1257–1274. [CrossRef]
20. Geels, F.W. Processes and patterns in transitions and system innovations: Refining the co-evolutionary
multi-level perspective. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2005, 72, 681–696. [CrossRef]
21. Geels, F.W. Ontologies, socio-technical transitions (to sustainability), and the multi-level perspective.
Res. Policy 2010, 39, 495–510. [CrossRef]
22. Hughes, T.P. The evolution of large technological systems. Soc. Constr. Technol. Syst. New Dir. Sociol. Hist.
Technol. 1987, 82, 86–89.
23. Silverberg, G.; Dosi, G.; Orsenigo, L. Innovation, Diversity and Diffusion: A Self-Organisation Model. Econ. J.
1988, 98, 1032. [CrossRef]
24. Geels, F.W. The hygienic transition from cesspools to sewer systems (1840–1930): The dynamics of regime
transformation. Res. Policy 2006, 35, 1069–1082. [CrossRef]
25. Van den Ende, J.; Kemp, R. Technological transformations in history: How the computer regime grew out of
existing computing regimes. Res. Policy 1999, 28, 833–851. [CrossRef]
26. Geels, F.W. Analysing the breakthrough of rock ‘n’ roll (1930–1970) Multi-regime interaction and
reconfiguration in the multi-level perspective. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2007, 74, 1411–1431. [CrossRef]
27. Uyarra, E.; Gee, S. Transforming urban waste into sustainable material and energy usage: The case of Greater
Manchester (UK). J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 50, 101–110. [CrossRef]
28. Raven, R.P.J.M. Towards alternative trajectories? Reconfigurations in the Dutch electricity regime. Res. Policy
2006, 35, 581–595. [CrossRef]
29. Smith, A. Green niches in sustainable development: The case of organic food in the United Kingdom.
Environ. Plan. C Gov. Policy 2006, 24, 439–458. [CrossRef]
30. Geels, F.W. A socio-technical analysis of low-carbon transitions: Introducing the multi-level perspective into
transport studies. J. Transp. Geogr. 2012, 24, 471–482. [CrossRef]
31. Rotmans, J.; Kemp, R.; van Asselt, M. More evolution than revolution: Transition management in public
policy. Foresight 2001, 3, 15–31. [CrossRef]
288
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4057
32. Loorbach, D.; Rotmans, J. Managing Transitions for Sustainable Development. In Understanding Industrial
Transformation: Views from Different Disciplines; Olsthoorn, X., Wieczorek, A.J., Eds.; Springer: Dordrecht,
The Netherlands, 2006; pp. 187–206.
33. Kemp, R.; Loorbach, D. Governance for Sustainability through Transition Management. Work. Paper. 2003,
pp. 1–27. Available online: http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/openmtg/docs/kemp.pdf (accessed on 6
November 2018).
34. Schot, J.; Geels, F.W. Strategic niche management and sustainable innovation journeys: Theory, findings,
research agenda, and policy. Technol. Anal. Strateg. Manag. 2008, 20, 537–554. [CrossRef]
35. Kemp, R.; Schot, J.; Hoogma, R. Regime shifts to sustainability through processes of niche formation:
The Approach of Strategic Niche Management. Technol. Anal. Strateg. Manag. 1998, 10, 175–195. [CrossRef]
36. Geels, F.W. The multi-level perspective on sustainability transitions: Responses to seven criticisms.
Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. 2011, 1, 24–40. [CrossRef]
37. Hargreaves, T.; Haxeltine, A.; Longhurst, N.; Seyfang, G. Sustainability Transitions from the Bottom-Up:
Civil Society, the Multi-Level Perspective and Practice Theory; CSERGEWorking Paper 2011-01; EconStor: Kiel,
Germany, 2011.
38. Smith, A.; Hargreaves, T.; Hielscher, S.; Martiskainen, M.; Seyfang, G. Making the most of community
energies: Three perspectives on grassroots innovation. Environ. Plan. A 2016, 48, 407–432. [CrossRef]
39. Seyfang, G.; Longhurst, N. Desperately seeking niches: Grassroots innovations and niche development in
the community currency field. Glob. Environ. Chang. 2013, 23, 881–891. [CrossRef]
40. Yin, R. Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 2nd ed.; Sage: Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, 1994.
41. Kay, C. Reflections on rural violence in Latin America. Third World Q. 2001, 22, 741–775. [CrossRef]
42. Robles,W. The landless rural workers movement (MST) in Brazil. J. Peasant Stud. 2001, 28, 146–161. [CrossRef]
43. Branford, S.; Rocha, J. Cutting the Wire: The Story of the Landless Movement in Brazil; Latin America Bureau:
London, UK, 2002; ISBN 1899365516.
44. Freudenberg, N.; Cohen, N.; Poppendieck, J.; Willingham, C. Food Policy in New York City Since 2008:
Lessons for the Next Decade; CUNY Graduate School of Public Health and Health Policy: New York, NY,
USA, 2018.
45. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) “L’Ecovillage de Mbackombel sort de l’ombre”.
Available online: http://www.sn.undp.org/content/senegal/fr/home/ourwork/environmentandenergy/
successstories/-l_ecovillage-de-mbackombel-sort-de-lombre.html (accessed on 29 October 2018).
46. Wittman, H. Reframing agrarian citizenship: Land, life and power in Brazil. J. Rural Stud. 2009, 25, 120–130.
[CrossRef]
47. Reynolds, K.; Cohen, N. Beyond the Kale: Urban Agriculture and Social Justice Activism in New York City;
University of Georgia Press: Athens, GA, USA, 2016.
48. Ritz, S. The Power of a Plant: A Teacher’s Odyssey to Grow Healthy Minds and Schools; Rodale Inc.: Emmaus, PA,
USA, 2017.
49. Poppendieck, J. Free for All: Fixing School Food in America; University of California Press: Berkeley, CA,
USA, 2011.
50. Grin, J.; Rotmans, J.; Schot, J. Transitions to Sustainable Development. New Directions in the Study of Long Term
Transformative Change; Routledge: New York, NY, USA; Abingdon, UK, 2010.
51. Grin, J. The Governance of Transitions: An Agency Perspective. In Transitions to Sustainable Development:
New Directions in the Study of Long Term Transformative Change; Grin, J., Rotmans, J., Schot, J., Eds.; Routledge:
New York, NY, USA, 2010; pp. 265–284.
52. Boudreau, J.-A. Making new political spaces: Mobilizing spatial imaginaries, instrumentalizing spatial
practices, and strategically using spatial tools. Environ. Plan. A 2007, 39, 2593–2611. [CrossRef]
53. Landry, C. The Creative City: A Toolkit for Urban Innovators; Routledge: New York, NY, USA; Abingdon, UK,
2012; ISBN 1136554483.
54. Block, T.; Paredis, E. Urban development projects catalyst for sustainable transformations: The need for
entrepreneurial political leadership. J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 50, 181–188. [CrossRef]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
289
sustainability
Article
Strategy for the Sustainability of a Food Production
System for the Prosperity of Low-Income Populations
in an Emerging Country: Twenty Years of Experience
of the Peruvian Poultry Association
Alejandro Fontana 1,*, Ignacio de los Ríos Carmenado 2, Johan Villanueva-Penedo 1,
José Ulloa-Salazar 1 and Denisse Santander-Peralta 1
1 PAD Escuela de Dirección, Universidad de Piura, Av. Aldebarán 160, Lima 15023, Peru;
j.villanueva.penedo@gmail.com (J.V.-P.); jose.ulloa.salazar@gmail.com (J.U.-S.);
dsantander@mba.pad.edu (D.S.-P.)
2 GESPLAN Research Group. School of Agricultural, Food and Biosystems Engineering, Universidad
Politécnica de Madrid, Calle Ramiro de Maeztu, 7, 28040 Madrid, Spain; ignacio.delosrios@upm.es
* Correspondence: afontana@pad.edu; Tel.: +51-999-166-073
Received: 29 September 2018; Accepted: 30 October 2018; Published: 3 November 2018
	

Abstract: This research shows a business initiative that has been able to integrate into an
environmentally sustainable food production system, such as poultry farming, a positive impact on
food security and public health patterns of low-income populations in an emerging country. For a
process that took 20 years, the adopted strategy has become a positive experience of sustainability
and prosperity in low-income populations in Peru. The objective of the research is to conceptualize
and identify the key elements of this experience so that its replication in other food production
systems to impact favorably the prosperity of such vulnerable population. The Working With People
(WWP) model, a validated methodology for analyzing the sustainability and prosperity of rural areas
in Europe, is used for the analysis of this experience. The analysis shows that the presence of the
three dimensions of this model (political-contextual, technical-business, and ethical-social) ensure
the sustainability of a food production system that has an impact on the prosperity of low-income
populations in emerging countries. This balance is important to enrich the connections between
sustainability and prosperity, with other concepts such as core values in companies, public-private
cooperation, food safety, inclusion and consumption patterns.
Keywords: sustainability; food systems; nutrition; public-private cooperation; corporate values;
sanitary control; food safety; prosperity
1. Introduction
The case study shows a private initiative that has integrated the perspective of an environmentally
friendly food production, such as poultry farming [1], into a positive impact on consumption and
social inclusion, and a contribution to public health standards.
The Peruvian Poultry Association, founded in 1938, is a group of companies dedicated to raising
poultry products, and which brings together the whole domain of companies in the sector. Currently,
the eleven most important companies represent 85% of market share. On the initiative of the board
of directors of this association, a system of poultry meat production has been developed in Peru,
which has allowed to families who had had minimal access to any kind of animal protein to increase it
steadily in the last 20 years.
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035; doi:10.3390/su10114035 290 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
During this period of time, the actions promoted by the Peruvian Poultry Association (APA)
have generated production to grow from 400 thousand tons annuals to almost 2 million tons annually.
In parallel, the annual consumption of low-income families has been increased from 10 kg per year to
35 kg per year. On the other hand, this initiative has also improved the health safety of poultry meat.
The objective of the research has been to analyze this case study with the purpose of extracting
from it some lessons that can be recommended for the creation of food production systems that
have an impact on the prosperity of populations with low resources in emerging countries. In this
sense, the research question has been formulated as: What strategy can ensure the sustainability
of food production systems that impact the prosperity of populations with fewer resources from
emerging countries?
To analyze this experience, we have used the Working With People (WWP) framework [2],
a methodology previously validated for the analysis of the sustainability of production systems and
its contribution to the prosperity of rural populations [3,4]. This methodology allows identifying
the critical variables of the success of an experience through the analysis of its three dimensions:
territorial-contextual; technical-business; and ethical-social.
The analysis of the case study under the WWP methodology shows that an initiative of an
association of companies can generate a system of food production that benefits the low-income people
of an emerging country. This analysis underscores the objective of the business initiative must focus
on the prosperity of society.
At the same time, this case validates the assertion that the strategy of a food production system
that contemplates the three dimensions of the WWP model ensures the sustainability of a system that
impacts the prosperity of low-income populations in an emerging country.
The article has been structured collecting, in the first place, some experiences on the sustainability
of food production systems; then the methodology used has been described, including a detailed
description of the case, its conceptualization and the elements that demonstrate its sustainability;
thirdly, the case analysis under the WWP model is presented under its three dimensions.
1.1. Sustainability: Relevance and Scope
Two important controversial issues impact the present times: on one hand, the rapid increase of
environmental challenges caused by the climate change and a greater awareness of the environmental
impact; and on the other hand, the ethical requirement to contribute to prosperity of low-income
population: poverty eradication and hunger [5]. Also, this dilemma needs to be solved in the medium
term. At current growth rates, by 2050, an increase of between 60% and 110% in global food production
will be needed [6]. And this increase will take place in a context of climate change and without
compromising resources needed to serve future generations. Parallelly, according to the World Bank,
the number of people under the poverty line of US$ 1.90/day in the world has increased in 2.5%
between 2016 and 2017: increasing to 768 million of people [7].
For Rockström et al. [6], the solution to this dilemma must focus on the transformation of intensive
agricultural systems, so that agriculture ceases to be the biggest global change factor to become a key
contributor in the transition to a sustainable world. However, as Brklacich et al. presented, the concerns
about the sustainability of food production systems is not only be confined to agriculture systems and
their impact in the environment degradation [8].
These authors presented in 1991 a detailed and exhaustive review of the academic literature about
different dimensions for the concept of sustainable food production systems [8]. Thus, they found
out that six major themes underpinning sustainability: environmental accounting, sustained yield,
carrying capacity, production unit viability, product supply and security, and equity [8].
Environmental accounting refers to biophysical limits for agricultural systems and has been
presented as the most important theme for sustainability [8]. Sustained yield describes the group
of conditions that would stabilize crop yields from year to year [9]. This theme was extended to
agricultural activities from the forest sector.
291
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
Carrying capacity refers to the maximum population size who could use a site without causing
permanent damage to the natural environment. However, as Brklacich et al. pointed out, the estimation
of population that may be supported by a particular site is affected by the interactions among a wide
range of socioeconomic, behavioral, and biophysical factors. This way, “estimating population size
which can be supported by a particular region is central to measuring the sustainability of food
production systems” [8] (p. 7).
Production unit viability focuses on the performance and viability of individual farms.
“The viability of farms is an important concern within the broader context of sustainable food
production systems. Without adequate economic rewards for agricultural producers, it will be
increasingly difficult for farms to remain in food production system” [8] (p. 8).
Product supply and security means the adequacy of food supply levels to meet the population
minimal requirements for nutrition and satisfy cultural demands or dietary preferences. In fact, food
security cannot be reduced to just one economic activity: food is a complex matrix that demands a
holistic approach to capture the complexity of nutrition and its impact on health [10,11].
Equity refers “to fair access to production opportunities and a balanced distribution of production
costs, goods, and services associated with resource use” [8] (p. 9). This way, it is a common requirement
that enhancing prospects for sustainable food production must include conditions for improving living
conditions for the least advantaged groups within society: “increasingly, a secure food supply that
is accessible to all members of society is being recognized as a vital component of a sustainable food
production system” [8] (p. 9).
There are authors who recognize there cannot be sustainability without inclusion. A system of
food production cannot be sustainable if it is not equitable: if it does not meet the basic needs of all,
and at the same time, it opens opportunities to improve their quality of life. Not doing so would mean
being exposed to the problems of major migrations, geopolitical crises, and social conflicts [12].
Equity has also an intergenerational level of application. The concern is “meeting the needs of
the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” [13]
(p. 43). This is also recognized by Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO): the sustainability of an
agricultural system implies ensuring food security and nutrition for all now and in the future [14].
Brklacich et al. propose a definition of sustainable food production system: “an agri-food sector
that over the long term can simultaneously: maintain or enhance environmental quality; provide
adequate economic and social rewards to all individuals and firms in the production system; and
produce a sufficient and accessible food supply” [8] (p. 10).
Keoleian and Heller [15] argue that improving the sustainability of food production systems
requires a clear understanding of the relationships between the behavior of population consumption,
food processing, distribution activities, and production practices. Thus, these authors conclude that
an adequate understanding of the life cycle of the product is a very useful tool to understand the
existing relationships between social needs, and social and natural processes. These relationships
allow understanding those needs and the environmental impact of the satisfaction of said needs.
Another factor mentioned in the academic literature for the sustainability of the productive
system is the impact of food on public health. The current concern is given by the appearance or
reappearance of human diseases that are of zoonotic origin. Even the term One Health is used to
refer to the essential relationship that exists between human health and animal health. In this sense,
a practical recommendation is the reduction of the use of antibiotics in the care of animals [10].
This multiplicity of social and productive factors implies that responsibility for the sustainability
of food production systems does not rest solely with the state. Van Meijl, Ruben and Reinhard [12]
argue that sustainability is everyone’s job and that the business sector is called to participate in it,
making inclusion and sustainability part of the company’s core values. On the other hand, Verburg
et al. [10] argue that food security is linked to government policies, that is, a strategic vision that looks
at the long term, and therefore demands a governance approach: an adequate interaction between
292
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
the state, the market and the civil society [14,16], and effective institutions to obtain good results in
sustainable agricultural development strategies [14].
1.2. Prosperity
Prosperity has been conventionally defined as the economic growth, but this definition has not
been able to account for the negatives environmental consequences, serious material impacts that
compromise future possibilities and lack of opportunities for all. A prosperity focuses on few people,
and founded on ecological degradation and steadily social injustice is not appropriated for a fair
society [17].
From this point of view, Jackson [18] has popularized a new approach of prosperity: the human
beings flourishing, the achievement of greater social cohesion and higher levels of well-being while
reducing their material impact on the environment.
Indeed, he accepts that prosperity has material dimensions to ensure adequate supply of food,
shelter, clothing, water, etc. without an environmental degradation. But, he also explains that a human
being is also affected by psychological and social dimensions. Thus, everyone needs a meaning and
purpose in life, and to participate in building on the common good of one’s community: working
usefully, enjoying respect to other people, or voluntarism. In other words, a sense of community and
meaningful work is essential: “ensures nutritional health, takes part in the life of the community,
uses their education, finds worthwhile jobs, appears in public without shame, visit friends and
relations” [19] (p. 15).
This vision of prosperity may serve us to precise the most well-known and well-used dimensions
of sustainability for food production systems: economic, social, and environmental. “The economic,
social and environmental have been the most well-known and well-used pillars of sustainability” [20]
(p. 13). For example, when Castellini [21] compared three poultry production systems, he defined the
social dimension as labor safety, this is, he only took into account the impact of the different production
processes on worker health, and not how those systems are socially affecting the whole society.
2. Methodology
The methodology used was the analysis of a case study that occurred in an emerging country.
The access to official information and also the access to the most relevant actors of this case has
allowed assuring the internal and external validity. In fact, each step of the analysis process has been
documented to ensure its reliability [22]. The APA case study is located in Peru, a country in South
America with an area of more than 1,200,000 km2 and also with a complex geography (Figure 1).
The objective of the research has been to find out the variables that can ensure the sustainability
of a food production system that contributes to the prosperity of low-income families of emerging
countries, and the methodology used for this analysis has been the WWWframework.
WWP proposes a ‘new approach’ for sustainability and prosperity in postmodernity in rural
and food production systems. Key to the WWP model is ‘planning as social learning’ and a ‘new
postmodern sensibility’ [2,23,24]. The nameWorkingWith People was chosen to convey the need to
overcome the traditional technical-economic vision of prosperity, and the need to focus on individuals’
behavior and the context in which they work.
In 2016, the WWP framework has been validated as an instrument to analyze rural development,
rural prosperity and resilience in a world of growing demands and limited resources. This validation
was done under the international RETHINK research program supported by European Commission
and funding bodies in 14 countries under the FP7 and the RURAGRI ERA-NET called RETHINK [3,4].
“The research members of Rethink formed a multi-sectorial and inter-disciplinary Expert Panel to
create the reporting guidelines on each theme. The Expert Panel provided research advice on effective
strategies and ways of rural prosperity and established the common guidelines for the creation of
questionnaires based on the methodological framework Working With People (WWP)” [3] (p. 87).
293
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
Figure 1. The political map of Peru. Source: National Geographic Institute.
The WWP model seeks to integrate expert knowledge with experienced knowledge, and also
connect knowledge with action, but incorporating the values of the different participants of the flow of
goods or services of any project [3].
In this sense, this model considers behavioral competences and a solid ethical basis; contextual
competencies; and technical competencies as key elements for the sustainability of a system that
has an impact on the prosperity of a society [3]. This methodological framework goes beyond the
technical-economic view, and integrates social learning processes in the analysis and the building of
prosperity from three dimensions: ethical-social, technical-entrepreneurial and political-contextual.
These three components interact through social-learning processes (Figure 2), and include the
four fields of a social-relationship system, as defined by Friedmann [25]: the political field, the
public administration field, the private and entrepreneurial field, and finally the civil society field.
The apparent simplicity of WWP involves a large social complexity [2] given the richness of the
relationships and lessons that occur between the three components of the model.
From the Political-contextual dimension, organizations involved ought to adapt their priorities
and their projects in the context in which they work to achieve sustainable management [3].
This dimension covers the ability to make relations with political organizations and with the different
public-administrations that enhance sustainable development and thereby foster the prosperity of rural
areas and its agricultural communities. The design of modern strategies for the sustainability of a food
production system requires social integration and anticipating the long-term trends affecting rural areas.
The configuration of WWP strategies for the sustainability must ensure that organizational change
processes and structural processes are generated to allow adaptation to the priorities of involved people,
also working with actors from the political and public administration fields. WWP organization has,
therefore, an instrumental character, to serve the population, and it is flexible and changing according
to the learning and the new information generated. This way, the WWP organization becomes
a living entity, which transmit values to society—from its ethical component—and is capable of
294
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
influencing and changing political priorities and to work together to achieve sustainable management.
This political-contextual dimension builds on the understandings of prosperity as capabilities for
flourishing [18,26].
Figure 2. Dimensions of sustainability and prosperity from the WWP model. Source: [2]. With
authors’ permission.
The Technical-business dimension is oriented towards the generation of sustainable products
and services for the society based on quality standards and providing environmental, social and
economic benefits. From the point of view of social relations, this dimension corresponds to the
private-entrepreneurial field, which comprises all activities of private initiative. The WWP project
adopts a “business function”—as mobilizing human, economical, public, private resources—leading
to the arrangement and negotiation between various actors and involves a commitment to assume
and manage risk. This technical-business dimension exceeds economic imperative and include social
and environmental criteria [27,28] and multi-stakeholder business governance to creates rich social
networks that allow new sustainable strategies [29], recognizing that—given a diminishing marginal
utility of goods—“more is not always better”. Given this view, the merely commercial and financial
aspects of WWP project are exceeded; it serves not only to achieve “tangible” benefits to care about the
“intangible” benefits in the form of expansion of knowledge, and social and cultural aspects to develop
sustainable solutions [2].
And from the Ethical-social dimension considers the context of behaviors, attitudes, and values
of people who interact throughout production processes. This component is identified with the
social subsystem, consisting of all interpersonal relationships that are taking place within society.
The ground of the social system that surrounds WWP project is to cover conduct and moral behavior
of stakeholders and it sets out the “foundations” to make people, both from private and public fields,
come to work together, with commitment, confidence and personal freedom [2]. The incorporation of
ethics, means considering the project as not ‘neutral’, but based on an ideal of service and guided by
values. This dimension integrates behavioral competences with ethics and values as appropriate
elements to overcome potential moral conflicts related to the interested parties involved in the
project [30]. The WWP project seen from this dimension tries to achieve the best for a greater number
of people, especially the poorest people with few resources and the participation of the beneficiaries
for the effective sustainable development and modernizing the farming practices, like sustainable
food systems.
Finally, the integrating dimension of the three dimensions is social learning [25]. These dimension
to ensure social learning processes among the different subsystems, which lead to learn from the real
agents of change. The social learning process runs with the main assumption that all effective learning
comes from the experience of reality change. The population affected by the project actively participates
in planning, with their own behaviors, attitudes and values—ethical-social component—to promote
and manage the WWP project. Therefore, it requires to generate actions directed to integrate the
295
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
experienced knowledge [31] of the affected population, along with the planner’s expertise, providing
mutual learning. To do so, reliability is essential among the agents of the different social subsystems,
generated from responsibility, a proper behavior, rigor, trustworthiness, and an open and consistent
attitude [30]. Similarly, to ensure these social learning areas and processes, it requires to have a
proper appreciation of values, defined as the ability to understand the inherent qualities of others and
understand their points of view. This leads us again to say that ethics and behavior of people involved
are the basis of WWP project.
According to the principles set up within the WWP framework, the analysis has been made from
two types of data: qualitative and quantitative data. First, during the last six years there have been
several interviews with the key actors of this intervention. In 2003, an interview was conducted with
the Director of National Agrarian Health Service (SENASA), who previously was the head of Animal
Health in 1996, and the person who represented SENASA at the beginning of the relationship with
APA. Also, an interview was conducted with the person of APA who represented the association
in that relationship. Additionally, another interview was undertaken with the CEO of APA. Then,
to ensure full and complete participation of the different company sized members of APA, a fourth
interview was carried out with one of the CEOs of the smallest company members of APA. In 2015,
the CEO of APA was interviewed again. All of these interviews were recorded.
Then, in 2018, and in order to update the data for this research, a focus group was carried out
with the President of APA; the CEO of APA; the person in charge of the market access project of APA
(who was the first head of the national program of Poultry Health by SENASA, in 2004); and the head
of the poultry and egg committee of APA. Then, a phone interview was conducted with the CEO of
the leading company of the sector, and finally a last interview was carried out with the President and
the CEO of APA.
For all of these in-depth interviews, semi-structured questionnaires were prepared. The questions
were divided into the three dimensions of the WWP framework: territorial-contextual,
technical-business, and ethical-social in order to recognize the key variables of the APA initiative
on each one of these dimensions. The interviews were conducted face to face with the
stakeholders involved.
Information was also obtained from previous investigations, statistics and official documents
of the government of Peru, which were collected to examine the evolution of APA actions and their
impact on the sustainability of a food production system that benefits the population of fewer resources
in the country.
To ensure the internal validity of the case, a quantitative analysis was carried out based on the
National Household Survey (ENAHO), which the National Institute of Statistics and Informatics
(INEI) performs each year at the national level with the intention of measuring, individually and
by family, different attributes of the population. This survey has modules on employment, health,
income, expenses, consumption, among others, which have representation at the national, regional,
rural, urban or geographical levels.
Specifically, Household Expenses module and the SUMMARY module for expenditures has been
used. The data analysis software used has been STATA 15.0, and the methodology has had two parts:
processing and calculation. The processing included the review and identification of the variables
to be used and the household identifiers; the unification of the databases; and the creation of the
necessary variables for doing the calculation. It also involved the estimation of the values of the
different variables. In this way, as the sample is representative at a national level, the evolution of
the average annual consumption of poultry by families between 2004 and 2017 were found for three
segments: extremely poor, poor, and non-poor.
Regarding the limitations of the quantitative analysis, information is only available since 2004.
On the other hand, the poverty categorization used by the INEI is based on the calculation of a poverty
line linked to the monetary and non-monetary value of a basket of consumption appropriate to the
circumstances of the respondent’s region.
296
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
The Case of the Peruvian Poultry Association (APA)
In 1998, the APA consisted of 13 contributing companies that accounted for more than 70% of the
poultry production in Peru, however it included all the producer companies of poultry products in the
country as members of the association. As part of its activities, the association held the representation of
the companies of the sector before the government and organized, also collectively, several commercial
campaigns. The factor that had most influenced the collective action was the success of the commercial
campaign to spread the quality of the chicken raised in industrial farms.
In the years prior to 1998, companies in the sector had to face several crises: from a market of
prices controlled by the State in the 1970s and 1980s, the market had switched to a system of free
competition; the sector had stopped being exonerated the 18% of value added tax, an amount that
had to be absorbed by the companies themselves, and that caused the bankruptcy of several of them.
And finally, in 1996, the business association and twelve companies in the sector were accused of
price agreements.
In 1998, the per capita consumption of poultry meat per year in Peru was 19.5 kg, and represented
the main source of animal protein consumed by Peruvians: 46% of animal protein. In addition, the
sector represented 1.16% of the national GDP, and 14.8% of the agricultural sector [32].
It was in these circumstances that the APA board realized that poultry production and marketing
was more than a simple exchange of consumer goods for an amount of money. If the need they were
satisfying was a component of the prosperity of the Peruvian population, then they should act seeking
the food and nutritional security of the entire population. With these concerns, they realized the
importance of working to improve their productivity. Their main cost overrun was the expense caused
by chicken diseases: drop in feed conversion, losses of chickens, and a high expenditure on medicines
for chickens focused in carrying out a health control program. The APA board also considered that
competition between companies in the sector would ensure the transfer of said savings to the consumer
(Interview with the CEO of the leading company of the sector and interview with a member of the
APA Board of directors in 1996).
In this way, the APA board decided to approach the National Agrarian Health Service (SENASA),
the decentralized entity of the Ministry of Agriculture in charge of sanitary control. However,
as SENASA did not have the poultry sector in its operational plan, it did not have the financial
resources to run a vaccination program for domestic poultry, fowl and migratory birds. Therefore,
the program had to be financed by private companies until public resources generated by a national
sanitary regulation could be available. In this sense, it was also necessary to work on this regulation,
which was estimated to go into effect in less than two years (Interview with the head of animal health
of SENASA in 1996).
In these circumstances, the eight largest companies in the sector decided to finance this program
for three and a half years, until the sanitary standard set a rate for all industrial poultry breeders
(Interview with a member of the APA Board of directors in 1996).
3. Results: The Analysis of the Case Study under the WWP Framework
In order to demonstrate the research hypothesis of this work, the case study is analyzed under each
one of the WWP dimensions: political-contextual; technical-business; and ethical-social. This analysis
allows to identify the key variables and also to organize them systematically, so the model could
be replicated in emerging countries. For this reason, first of all, the intervention’s strategy has been
drawn. Secondly, the key variables emerged from the different interviews conducted and the public
information collected have been written down under the appropriate WWP dimension.
297
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
3.1. Political-Contextual Dimension: Conceptualization of the Intervention Strategy
A first key element of the intervention strategy of this case (Figure 3) has been the adequate
definition of the problem: the main cost overrun is due to the lack of sanitary control in poultries that
are outside industrial farms.
Figure 3. The definition of the intervention’s strategy. Source: Own elaboration. SENASA: National
Agrarian Health Service.
A second key element was the definition of the territory. An important aspect of the sanitary
control program is the definition of the scope. Initially, the poultry companies considered necessary
only the attention of the farms adjoining their farms. However, the SENASA staff helped APA to
understand that the risk came from any poultry that was in the country, so that the measures had
to be extended to the entire national territory, including domestic farms which raise poultries for
self-consumption or for small commercialization scale, fowl, and migratory birds (interview with the
head of animal health of SENASA in 1996).
A third key variable of this dimension has been the horizontal cooperation between the private
companies in the sector. In 1998, APA had been in operation for 60 years, and the owners of the 13
associated poultry companies took an active part in the association. This horizontal cooperation was
also manifested in the joint decision of the eight main companies in the sector to finance the vaccination
program for three and a half years. “We started by asking the leader for his contribution, and when
we had it, we told each of the rest if we could count on theirs because we already had the leader’s
contribution. Then each one said yes” (interview with an APA member of the Board of Directors in
1996).
Another key variable has been the public-private cooperation between APA and SENASA. Until
1996, there was no articulation between the companies in the sector and SENASA. Each one did his
tasks according to his best criteria. The industrial farms worried about the running of their business,
and they did not allow any public official to enter their facilities or share their information. In addition,
as the international cooperation agencies did not grant loans for assistance to the poultry sector, in the
annual plans of SENASA there was no such sector. And since the evaluation of public officials is
based on compliance with the objectives and goals included in their annual plans, there was no reason
to think about a health control program for the poultry sector. This cooperation required several
attempts and efforts of the directors of both institutions. The Head of Animal Health of SENASA
in 1996 commented: “It took two years of meetings and constant conversations between APA and
SENASA to build trust and find a common vision for the future” (interview with a member of APA
Board of directors in 1996 and the Head of Animal Health of SENASA in 1996).
Other key element of the intervention strategy was to give prominence to the direct people in
charge: SENASA, who was in charge of the direction and management of the vaccination program for
298
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
domestic and combat poultries, and migratory birds. Table 1 shows the number of animals vaccinated
between 2003 and 2012.
Table 1. Number of vaccinated domestic poultry per year.
Province 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Ancash 1155
Piura 23,048 11,711
Ica 2814 775,684 713,066 565,871 119,143 259,155 330,551 269,893 304,294 291,667
Cajamarca 6 16,023 3877 3135
Arequipa 142,428 300,671 321,554 273,950 39,923 245,205 202,111 125,490 83,466 217,537
Lambayeque 310 17,477
La Libertad 321,137 156,763 353,217 706,255 138,115 392,331 444,430 299,736 464,396 519,172
Madre de Dios 1071 1304 4443 9530 348
Moquegua 2349
Lima y Callao 30,639 519,266 536,805 828,100 69,905 308,007 514,716 137,949 592,642 793,016
Puno 1297 17,268
Tacna 13,584 4501 2677 5853 8541 62,135 44,606 76,831 57,842
Apurimac 1960 4132 11,602
Total 510,602 1,756,885 1,927,319 2,381,100 376,924 1,223,270 1,564,166 893,697 1,562,216 1,923,507
Source: SENASA data. Own elaboration.
The last key perspective of this dimension has been the articulation of the four social actors: the
business sector, public administration, the political sphere, and civil society. This articulation was
essential for the design and promulgation of the national sanitary control system with an international
standard, that was given in 2007. The promulgation of this norm signified an articulation plan, which
had as its origin, the work between APA and SENASA (Interview with the general director of Animal
Health of SENASA in 1996). The Figure 4 shows the most important events during all the process.
Event
Regulation of the
Poultry Health
System
Year 2007
Beginning of the
National Health
Poultry Program
2004
Declaration as free
avian influenza
country
1996 2005
Beginning of
conversations between
APA-SENASA
Signature of the
agreement between
APA-SENASA
2000
Beginning of the
vaccination program
2002
Figure 4. The relation of the most important events during the process. Source: SENASA, 2010.
The management of SENASA for the poultry health system: roles and obligations. Own elaboration.
APA: Peruvian Poultry Association.
In this way, from the perspective of the planning of the public sphere, the intervention has
been characterized by having two complementary movements. A bottom-up movement: the private
initiative at the beginning of the intervention, typical of Social Learning planning model [25] and a
top-down movement: the securing of public recourses and the action of SENASA, typical of Policy
Analysis planning model [25]. The WWP model [2] proposes that in order to ensure the sustainability
of an intervention in a given territory, both planning models are required.
3.2. Technical-Business Dimension: Results and Sustainability of the Production System
Regarding the technical-entrepreneurial dimension, the relevant variables have been the
generation of a sanitary control system and a series of actions to improve the productivity of the sector.
For the Head of Animal Health of SENASA in 1996, the most significant result of this intervention
has been the generation of a sanitary control system that was defined with the new poultry health
regulation, which was enacted in November 2007.
For the generation of this health control system, the initial financing of the largest companies in
the sector played a relevant role. However, the sustainability of this system depends in a determining
way on public resources that are generated from a mandatory rate for all industrial farms.
299
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
The improvement of productivity is also a consequence of geo-referencing all of the 1500 poultry
farms in the country; the nationwide enumeration of the 45,000 domestic farms and fowl breeders;
the annual vaccination of approximately 2 million domestic poultries; the surveillance of poultries in
small farms, domestic breeding and migratory birds of 11 wetlands.
Another relevant technical variable for the sustainability of this production system has been a
feature of the system that companies in the sector have known how to hold: the short value chain.
The Peruvian market has always been characterized by consuming only the chicken that has been
benefited on the same day. This causes that in Metropolitan Lima, a city of 9 million inhabitants,
daily benefit and distribute between 750,000 and 1,000,000 chickens in the 7195 poultry sale stalls, in a
window of time that only goes from 3:30 a.m. at 8:00 a.m. (interview with the President of APA in
2018; interview with a poultry distributor and owner of sale stalls) [33,34].
In relation to 1998, the production of poultry meat has multiplied by 5.8, as shown in Figure 5.
At the same time, annual per capita consumption has gone from 19.5 kg in 1998 to 50.52 kg in
2017 (Figure 6); and in that period, it has been the animal protein that has shown the most internal
consumption (Figure 7).
-
200.00
400.00
600.00
800.00
1,000.00
1,200.00
1,400.00
1,600.00
1,800.00
2,000.00
1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016
Figure 5. The evolution of poultry meat production. Source: Agrarian Regional Directions – Direction
of Agrarian Information. Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MINAG). Own elaboration.
-
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Figure 6. The evolution of internal demand of poultry meat. Source: Agrarian Regional
Directions—Direction of Agrarian Information. MINAG. Own elaboration.
300
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
0
10
20
30
40
50
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 P
Poultry
Fish
Beef
Pork
Sheep
Goat
Figure 7. The evolution of internal demand for different types of source of animal protein. Source:
Regional Directories of Agriculture; Ministry of Production (Produce); FAO; MINAG. For 2017, some
results were still projected. Own elaboration.
On the other hand, in Figure 7 it can also be seen that the greater demand for poultry meat
has not been at the expense of the consumption of the other sources of animal protein: it is a higher
consumption for people who already consumed poultry or the consumption by people who previously
had not consumed any type of animal protein.
Regarding the impact that this intervention has had on populations with fewer resources in
the country, Table 2 shows the comparison of the evolution of the average consumption of poultry
meat for extremely poor, poor, and non-poor households between 2004 and 2017. The three segments
substantially increase their consumption: the extremely poor segment has an increase of 250%; the one
of poor, 27%; and the one of non-poor, 20%. The greatest impact of this production system is precisely
in improving the diet of the population with the least resources in the country.
Table 2. Comparison of the evolution of poultry meat consumption in extremely poor, poor and
non-poor families in Peru (kg/per family per year).
Year
Extremely Poor Poor Non Poor
Average Inf. Limit Sup. Limit Average Inf. Limit Sup. Limit Average Inf. Limit Sup. Limit
2004 10.40 9.24 11.55 55.52 53.31 57.72 85.37 82.77 87.97
2005 12.14 10.42 13.86 60.20 57.43 62.97 89.46 86.79 92.12
2006 8.83 7.80 9.87 52.04 49.64 54.43 93.62 90.92 96.33
2007 8.83 7.67 9.99 49.98 47.58 52.38 95.10 92.79 97.40
2008 29.08 25.23 32.93 71.68 68.30 75.05 113.81 111.46 116.16
2009 33.81 28.66 38.95 68.88 65.73 72.02 112.31 109.91 114.70
2010 29.46 26.65 32.28 66.40 63.08 69.73 111.89 109.49 114.28
2011 27.33 24.67 29.98 67.89 64.67 71.12 111.00 108.87 113.13
2012 30.08 26.48 33.69 67.44 64.42 70.46 109.38 107.35 111.42
2013 40.22 36.65 43.78 77.98 74.14 81.82 106.23 104.55 107.90
2014 28.73 25.50 31.96 69.85 66.76 72.94 106.41 104.79 108.02
2015 30.56 27.58 33.55 67.05 63.65 70.45 103.51 101.94 105.08
2016 28.81 25.96 31.66 67.27 64.10 70.45 101.47 100.06 102.88
2017 35.87 29.17 42.58 70.34 67.03 73.66 102.28 100.86 103.70
Source: Own elaboration since National Household Survey (ENAHO) data.
In the extremely poor segment, the positive impact has also occurred in the subsistence family
economies of the rural areas of the country. These families usually raise poultry in order to have a
product that they can commercialize in case of facing an illness or a special celebration. As the sanitary
control program has had a national scope, these families have been also benefited, because the program
301
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
has reduced the mortality of their chickens (Interview with a member of the APA Board of directors
in 1996).
On the other hand, Figure 8 shows the evolution of the problem of anemia and child malnutrition,
detailing its effect in the rural area. The improvement and positive evolution of the ratios of anemia
and chronic child malnutrition in Peru are due to a series of activities carried out by the State to
improve the living conditions of children: supplementing the infant diet with micronutrients; better
control of their development; vaccination and education campaigns. But to these activities, greater
access to food must also be added. The Demographic and Family Health Survey shows that in 2004
the percentage of infants who received some type of animal protein was 61%; the year 2013, 65.8%;
and the year 2017, 69.8% in nursing infants and 94% in non-nursing infants [35].
􀏬
􀏭􀏬
􀏮􀏬
􀏯􀏬
􀏰􀏬
􀏱􀏬
􀏲􀏬
􀏭􀏵􀏵􀏭􀍲􀏭􀏵􀏵􀏮 􀏭􀏵􀏵􀏲 􀏮􀏬􀏬􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏬􀏰􀍲􀏮􀏬􀏬􀏲 􀏮􀏬􀏬􀏳􀍲􀏮􀏬􀏬􀏴 􀏮􀏬􀏬􀏵 􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏬 􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏭 􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏮 􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏯 􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏰 􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏱 􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏲 􀏮􀏬􀏭􀏳
􀁨􀆌􀄏􀄂􀅶 􀁚􀆵􀆌􀄂􀅯 􀁤􀅽􀆚􀄂􀅯
Figure 8. The evolution of infant malnutrition in children under five years of age according to area of
residence in Peru (%). Source: National Statistics and Information Institute (INEI). Demographic and
family health survey.
It should also be mentioned that the national health system implemented by the APA initiative
has resulted in a decrease in the consumption of antibiotics to combat poultry diseases. This decrease
in the use of antibiotics improves the safety of this protein source (Interview with the President of
APA 2018).
The Head of Animal Health of SENASA in 1996 also commented that thanks to this joint work
between APA and SENASA, avian influenza did not enter Peru, despite having appeared in Chile and
Colombia. As a result of this, the declaration of an avian influenza-free country was given in June 2005,
and the possibility of entering the Japanese market in December of that same year.
Carranza [36], former Minister of Economy of Peru, pointed out that there have been few sectors
in the Peruvian economy that have gained this level of productivity. In a national conference, he
explained the poultry sector has been able to manage external shocks, to improve the food safety
conditions and to work together with the public sector.
The sustainability of this food production system is manifested in the results obtained in the
production of poultry meat in the last 20 years; in the increase of the animal protein consumption of
the populations of fewer resources; in improving the safety of this protein source; and in the impact it
has had on the prosperity of society.
3.3. Ethical-Social Dimension
This dimension has been present in a transversal way throughout the intervention, however, the
social awareness that has had the largest companies in the sector has been essential. Several authors
suggest that business associations are instruments to face similar problems in several companies [37–42].
302
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
On the other hand, as the cooperation between them in a common objective to the sector, it does not
mean that each company does not maintain its own competitive objectives, these common interests
can respond to strategies that benefit only the dominant companies in the industry [43].
In this sense, the performance of the APA has had a different objective. Moved by a social
sensibility, the association has acted focused in the search of the prosperity of the Peruvian population
with fewer resources. The CEO of the leading company commented: “If we could do something to
contribute to prosperity of people with fewer resources, we had to act on it. It is an important food for
people” (Personal phone interview).
So that they asked themselves how they should manage this business. What objectives should
companies pursue in the sector? and what specific actions could be promoted from the APA to
contribute to the improvement of families with few nutrition resources? (Interview with the President
of the APA in 2018).
This interest for contributing to prosperity of the national population also was concerned to some
of the SENASA officials. The head of Animal Health of SENASA in 1996 commented that he was one
of those who considered that public administration should be involved with the private sector in the
sanitary control of the poultry sector: “the agrarian health is a public good, and it claims pretty much
that all of us work for it. It is about serving society as a whole” (Interview with the head of Animal
Health in 1996).
On the other hand, this cooperation did not alter competition among companies in the sector:
Carranza [36], argues that it has been a highly competitive sector. In addition, these measures did
not harm small companies in the sector either. Referring to the mandatory rate for industrial farms,
the general manager of one of the small companies of APA commented: At the beginning, there were
many interpretations. Some of the directors of small businesses thought it would be restrictive for
small companies. However, it was finally seen as a self-assessment, in order to regulate ourselves,
and be more competitive. And he added: “the disease eradication program was not a measure of the
dominant companies in the sector to prevent the growth of small ones. There was no bad intention.
SENASA regulated and ordered the sector” (Interview with the general manager of a small associated
company).
4. Discussion
The objective of this research has been to analyze the case of the APA initiative in order to draw
the key variables which have to be taken in account to create a sustainable food production system,
that impacts positively on the prosperity of low-incomes families in emerging countries. For this
reason, the research question was set as what kind of strategy can assure the sustainability of a food
production system which impacts the prosperity of low-resources people in an emerging economy.
The literature review has suggested to start out our analysis for the sustainability of a food
production system using the definition proposed by Brklacich et al.: “an agri-food sector that over the
long term can simultaneously: (1) maintain or enhance environmental quality, (2) provide adequate
economic and social rewards to all individuals and firms in the production system, and (3) produce a
sufficient and accessible food supply” [8] (p. 9).
Also, this analysis considers the definition of prosperity proposed by Jackson [18] and the
theoretical framework of WWP. Thereby, the analysis of this study case allows plotting the main
features of a strategy for the sustainability of a food production system targeting the prosperity of
low-income populations in an emerging country.
Now, we are going to discuss these features of this strategy. First, the strategy starts out from a food
production system which is itself environmentally friendly. Broiler poultry is the most environmentally
efficient livestock among lamb, beef cattle, eggs, swine, dairy (milk), and turkey. “chicken broiler is
the most efficient with an input of 4 kcal of fossil energy per 1 kcal of broiler protein produced” [1].
Beef cattle varies between 20:1 and 40:1 and lamb raises up to 57:1 [1].
303
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
Also, producing 1 kg of beef requires about 43,000 L of water. In contrast, 1 kg of broiler chicken
can be produced with 2.6 kg of grain, which requires approximately 3500 L of water [1].
Comparing the animal protein consumption of fossil energy to the plant protein consumption
(1 kcal of animal protein requires approximately 10 times the energy expended to produce 1 kcal of
plant protein) [1], Pelletier criticizes the statement of environmentally friendly given to the poultry
livestock, and suggests to promote the consumption of plant [44]. However, as Pimentel also mentions,
“it should be noted that animal protein is 1.4 times more nutritious for humans than plant protein” [1].
Thereby, for emerging countries where there are high levels of malnutrition, especially in rural areas,
the broiler chicken should be accepted as an adequate supply of animal protein.
According to Van Mejil, Ruben and Reinhard [12], sustainability should be everyone’s job and the
business sector should be called to participate in it. The study case shows precisely this participation
from the beginning of the initiative. Also, the companies’ core values have been the engine of this
initiative which has pursued the prosperity of the low-income people of the country.
Thereby, the study case shows that an initiative of business companies can lead to the creation of
a sustainable food production system. This private initiative should satisfy some conditions:
First, sustainability and prosperity require a change of mentality in business men that allows
them to establish public–private partnerships and links with civil society. Herrero et al. state that
“business as usual investments in agriculture, although necessary are unlikely to deliver sustainable
solutions as the world rapidly change” [45] (p. 822). The aim of that initiative should be the prosperity
of the whole society, especially the low-income resource people.
Thereby, the social dimension of sustainability should concern the prosperity of society.
For example, when Castellini [21] presents his comparative analysis of three poultry production
systems, he considers labor safety as the social dimension of sustainability. Instead, the link between
sustainability and prosperity allows understanding that a sustainable food production system cannot
be built over an unfair social system [17], but over one which allows the human flourishing of the
whole society [18].
Second, the initiative should accomplish adequately three dimensions: ethical-social,
technical-business and political-contextual.
From the ethical-social dimension, it can be affirmed that in the strategy of the APA, this
component plays an essential role both in the concept of the initiative and in its execution. Interpersonal
relationships and behaviors lay the foundations for the managers and partners of the APA—together
with other actors from the public and private spheres—to work and advance together towards the
design of a strategy that ensures the sustainability of the production system of foods that impact on the
prosperity of populations with fewer resources. These processes allow improving people’s abilities and
competencies, with ethics and values as fundamental elements to overcome possible moral conflicts
and to work as a team.
This ethical requirement is according to the Brklacich, Bryant and Smit statement of their
three-dimensional definition of sustainable food production system (SFPS): “by casting this
three-dimensional definition for a SFPS in the context of long-term goals for agricultural land use and
food production, the equity perspective transcends all the three dimensions [8] (p. 10).
APA has developed a strategy that influences the technical-business dimension of sustainability
and prosperity, allowing the creation of a solid business structure that generates goods and services to
society and the most vulnerable populations. The initiative has allowed to the companies to reduce
production costs by cutting inefficient expenditures in medicines for poultry, and also by decreasing the
number of death birds by pests. And this savings has been translated to consumer by decisions of the
main companies and the high competition among all the companies in the sector. Thereby, the strategy
has achieved a considerable increase of the broiler chicken market: the annual consumption has raised
from 19.5 kg/hab in 1998 to 50 kg/hab.
Thus, the strategy of the APA has firstly ensured the accomplishment of the second dimension of
the Brklacich et al. definition of SFPS: provide adequate economic and social awards to all individuals
304
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
and firms in the production system; and secondly, to fulfill simultaneously the third dimension of their
definition: produce a sufficient and accessible food supply.
The study case, thereby, has accomplished the three components proposed in the Brklacich, Bryant
and Smit definition of SFPS. However, the analysis of the APA experience with the theoretical WWP
framework permits finding out unnoticed key variables for the Brklacich et al. definition of SFPS.
This is the political-contextual dimension of the WWP framework.
The strategy of APA to ensure the sustainability of food production systems and generate
prosperity also has an important political-contextual dimension, contributing to a strategic vision of
its activity of territorial scope. From this dimension, the APA improves the sustainability of its food
production system by complementing the actions of the business sector and public administration.
These synergies and complementarities are especially effective when carried out from alliances
based on trust, commitment, and reliability among partners, creating favorable environments for
good governance of policies. The capacities of the managers of these associations to establish
interrelations and negotiations between agents (public and private) of different levels (regional,
national or international) and to form strategic alliances, is a key factor for sustainability and prosperity.
The experience of the APA has generated horizontal cooperation between companies and cooperation
between the business sector and the public sector, which have been relevant to the sustainability of
their food production system.
In this way, the results confirm the need for a balance between the different dimensions of the
strategy: ethical-social, technical-business, and political-contextual to ensure the sustainability of food
production systems that affect the needs of populations with fewer resources.
Finally, the results also confirm the need for a balanced action among the different social actors to
lead to effective solutions to problems. In general, the case shows that a private initiative, business or
social, can solve a social problem. Therefore, from an academia perspective, it would be advisable to
propose the generation of more private initiatives that focus on solving social problems.
5. Conclusions
The sustained success of this business association is achieved when, in addition to generating
profitability in the associated companies, other values are generated that affect the improvement of the
quality of life of people. The companies incorporate social and environmental values, and guarantee a
means of subsistence for producers and businessmen, and cover the needs of the population.
The case of APA provides lessons of experience for the transformation of the conventional systems
of government of the business associations, towards a greater sustainability. In other words, when
businesses focus on the prosperity of low-income populations in an emerging country, a sustainable
system of food production can be generated, and then positively impact the prosperity of these
populations. The formation of a business association (APA) from the WWP model has managed to
generate a food production system that affects the three dimensions necessary to ensure sustainability
and prosperity.
The case study shows that an initiative of an association of companies can generate a
sustainable system of food production when considering the three dimensions of the WWP model:
political-contextual, technical-business, and ethical-social. In this way, it tries to answer the challenge
posed by Brklacich et al.: “the design and implementation of analytical systems that can readily
consider environmental, cultural, and economic conditions of particular region and simultaneously
measure the implications of alternative futures for environmental quality, food supplies, and the
well-being of individual producers” [8] (p. 11).
Author Contributions: Conceptualization and methodology, A.F. and I.d.l.R.C.; software, J.V.-P.; validation and
formal analysis, A.F., I.d.l.R.C. and J.V.-P.; investigation, A.F. and J.V.-P.; resources, A.F., I.d.l.R.C., J.V.-P., J.U.-S.,
D.S.-P.; writing—original draft preparation, A.F.; writing—review and editing, A.F. and I.d.l.R.C.
Funding: This research was funded by Universidad de Piura. PAD Escuela de Dirección. We propose to APA to
fund the APC.
305
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Apolonio Suárez and Mario Berrocal for their valuable collaboration.
We also are grateful with Stephen Pereira for his style review.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.
References
1. Pimentel, D.; Pimentel, M. Food, Energy and Society; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2008.
2. Cazorla, A.; De Los Ríos, I.; Salvo, M. Working with People (WWP) in Rural Development Projects:
A Proposal from Social Learning. Cuad. Desarro. Rural 2013, 10, 131–157.
3. De los Ríos, I.; Rivera, M.; García, C. Redefining Rural Prosperity through Social Learning in the Cooperative
Sector: 25 Years of Experience from Organic Agriculture in Spain. Land Use Policy 2016, 54, 85–94. [CrossRef]
4. Rivera, M.; Knickel, K.; de los Rios, I.; Ashkenazy, A.; Pears, D.Q.; Chebach, T.; Š ¯umane, S. Rethinking the
Connections between Agricultural Change and Rural Prosperity: A Discussion of Insights Derived from
Case Studies in Seven Countries. J. Rural Stud. 2018, 59, 242–251. [CrossRef]
5. Deaton, A. Health, Inequality, and Economic Development. J. Econ. Lit. 2003, 41, 113–158. [CrossRef]
6. Rockström, J.; Williams, J.; Daily, G.; Noble, A.; Matthews, N.; Gordon, L.; Wetterstrand, H.; DeClerck, F.;
Shah, M.; Steduto, P.; et al. Sustainable Intensification of Agriculture for Human Prosperity and Global
Sustainability. Ambio 2017, 46, 4–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Ferreira, F. The 2017 Global Poverty Update from theWorld Bank. Available online: http://blogs.worldbank.
org/developmenttalk/2017-global-poverty-update-world-bank (accessed on 29 October 2018).
8. Brklacich, M.; Bryant, C.R.; Smit, B. Review and Appraisal of Concept of Sustainable Food Production
Systems. Environ. Manag. 1991, 15, 1–14. [CrossRef]
9. Altieri, M.A. Agroecology: The Science of Sustainable Agriculture; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2018.
10. Verburg, P.H.; Mertz, O.; Erb, K.H.; Haberl, H.;Wu,W. Land System Change and Food Security: Towards
Multi-Scale Land System Solutions. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 2013, 5, 494–502. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Dwivedi, S.L.; Lammerts van Bueren, E.T.; Ceccarelli, S.; Grando, S.; Upadhyaya, H.D.; Ortiz, R. Diversifying
Food Systems in the Pursuit of Sustainable Food Production and Healthy Diets. Trends Plant Sci. 2017, 22,
842–856. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Van Meijl, H.; Ruben, R.; Reinhard, S. Towards an Inclusive and Sustainable Economy; Wageningen University &
Research: Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2017.
13. WCED. Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development: Our Common Future; Oxford
University Press: Oxford, UK, 1987.
14. FAO. Desarrollo Agrícola Sostenible Para La Seguridad Alimentaria y La Nutrición: ¿qué Función Desempeña La
Ganadería? FAO: Rome, Italy, 2016.
15. Heller, M.C.; Keoleian, G.A. Life Cycle-Based Sustainability Indicators for Assessment of the U.S. Food System;
Center for Sustainable Systems, University of Michigan: Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 2000.
16. Kooiman, J. Governing as Governance; Sage: Thousand Oaks, CA, USA, 2003.
17. Jackson, T.; Anderson, V. Redefining Prosperity-Essays in Pursuit of a Sustainable Economy; Earthcan: London,
UK, 2009.
18. Jackson, T. Prosperity without Growth: Economics for a Finite Planet; Routledge: London, UK, 2009.
19. Darnhofer, I.; De los Ríos, I.; Knickel, K.; Koopmans, M.; Lamine, C.; Olsson, G.A.; de Roest, K.; Rogge, E.;
Š ¯ umane, S.; Tisenkopfs, T. Rethinking the Links between Farm Modernisation, Rural Development and Resilience in
a World of Increasing Demands and Finite Resources; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2014.
20. Xu, L. Integrated Assessment of Sustainable Agri-Food Production System in Shaanxi Province, China. Ph.D.
Dissertation, University of Lethbridge, Lethbridge, AB, Canada, 2017.
21. Castellini, C.; Boggia, A.; Cortina, C.; Dal Bosco, A.; Paolotti, L.; Novelli, E.; Mugnai, C. A Multicriteria
Approach for Measuring the Sustainability of Different Poultry Production Systems. J. Clean. Prod. 2012, 37,
192–201. [CrossRef]
22. Yin, R.K. Case Study Methodology. In Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 3rd ed.; Sage: Thousand
Oaks, CA, USA, 2003.
306
Sustainability 2018, 10, 4035
23. Cazorla-Montero, A.; de los Ríos-Carmendo, I.; Díaz-Puente, J.M. La Iniciativa Comunitaria Leader Como
Model de Desarrollo Rural: Aplicación a La Región Capital de España. Agrociencia 2005, 39, 697–708.
24. De los Ríos-Carmenado, I.; Díaz-Puente, J.M.; Cadena-Iñiguez, J. La Iniciativa Leader Como Modelo de
Desarrollo Rural: Aplicación a Algunos Territorios de México. Agrociencia 2011, 45, 609–624.
25. Friedmann, J. Planning in the Public Domain: Discourse and Praxis. J. Plan. Educ. Res. 1989, 8, 128–130.
[CrossRef]
26. Sen, A. The Living Standard. Oxf. Econ. Pap. 1984, 36, 74–90. [CrossRef]
27. Davidson, J.; Lockwood, M. Partnerships as Instruments of Good Regional Governance: Innovation for
Sustainability in Tasmania? Reg. Stud. 2008, 42, 641–656. [CrossRef]
28. Grin, J. The Politics of Transition Governance in Dutch Agriculture. Conceptual Understanding and
Implications for Transition Management. Int. J. Sustain. Dev. 2012, 15, 72–89. [CrossRef]
29. Heley, J. Soft Spaces, Fuzzy Boundaries and Spatial Governance in Post-Devolution Wales. Int. J. Urban
Reg. Res. 2013, 37, 1325–1348. [CrossRef]
30. IPMA. Bases Para La Competencia En Dirección de Proyectos: Versión 3.1.; IPMA: Valencia, Spain, 2010.
31. Hulme, D. Learning and Not Learning from Experience in Rural Project Planning. Public Adm. Dev. 1989, 9,
1–16. [CrossRef]
32. Saldarriaga, M.A.; Structural policies specialist Central Reserve Bank of Peru. email message to authors.
17 May 2013.
33. MINAG. Comercialización de Pollos y Gallinas En Los Centros de Acopio de Lima Metropolitana y Callao; MINAG:
Lima, Perú, 2018.
34. INEI. Censo Nacional de Mercados de Abasto; INEI: Lima, Peru, 2016.
35. INEI. Encuesta Demográfica y de Salud Familiar; INEI: Lima, Peru, 2017.
36. Carranza, L. Contexto Nacional e Internacional y el Sector Avícola Peruano. Presented at Semana del
Avicultor Conference, Lima, Peru, Junio 2011.
37. Aldrich, H.E.; Staber, U.H. Organizing Business Interests: Patterns of Trade Association Foundings,
Transformation, and Deaths. In Ecological Models of Organization; Carrol, G., Ed.; Ballinger: Cambridge, MA,
USA, 1988; pp. 111–126.
38. Oliver, C. Determinants of Interorganizational Relationships: Integration and Future Directions.
Acad. Manag. Rev. 1990, 15, 241–265. [CrossRef]
39. Hemphill, T.A. Self-Regulating Industry Behavior: Antitrust Limitations and Trade Association Codes of
Conduct. J. Bus. Ethics 1992, 11, 915–920. [CrossRef]
40. David, P.; Baron, D.P. The Nonmarket Strategy System. Sloan Manag. Rev. 1995, 37, 73.
41. Hillman, A.J.; Hitt, M.A. Corporate Political Strategy Formulation: A Model of Approach, Participation, and
Strategy Decisions. Acad. Manag. Rev. 1999, 24, 825–842. [CrossRef]
42. Barnett, M.L. One Voice, but Whose Voice? Exploring What Drives Trade Association Activity. Bus. Soc.
2013, 52, 213–244. [CrossRef]
43. Williamson, O.Wage Rates as a Barrier to Entry: The Pennington Case in Perspective. Q. J. Econ. 1968, 82,
85–116. [CrossRef]
44. Pelletier, N. Environmental Performance in the US Broiler Poultry Sector: Life Cycle Energy Use and
Greenhouse Gas, Ozone Depleting, Acidifying and Eutrophying Emissions. Agric. Syst. 2008, 98, 67–73.
[CrossRef]
45. Herrero, M.; Thornton, P.K.; Notenbaert, A.M.;Wood, S.; Msangi, S.; Freeman, H.A.; Bossio, D.; Dixon, J.;
Peters, M.; Van De Steeg, J.; et al. Smart Investments in Sustainable Food Production: Revisiting Mixed
Crop-Livestock Systems. Science 2010, 327, 822–825. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
307
sustainability
Article
Offshore Wind Farms as Potential Locations for Flat
Oyster (Ostrea edulis) Restoration in the Dutch
North Sea
Pauline Kamermans 1,*, BrendaWalles 1, Marloes Kraan 1,2, Luca A. van Duren 3,
Frank Kleissen 3, Tom M. van der Have 4, Aad C. Smaal 5 and Marnix Poelman 1
1 Wageningen Marine Research,Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 77, 4400 AB Yerseke,
The Netherlands; brenda.walles@wur.nl (B.W.); marloes.kraan@wur.nl (M.K.);
marnix.poelman@wur.nl (M.P.)
2 Environmental Policy Group,Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 8130, 6700 EWWageningen,
The Netherlands
3 Deltares, P.O. Box 177, 2600 MH Delft, The Netherlands; luca.vanduren@deltares.nl (L.A.v.D.);
frank.kleissen@deltares.nl (F.K.)
4 Bureau Waardenburg, P.O. Box 365, 4100 AJ Culemborg, The Netherlands; t.m.van.der.have@buwa.nl
5 Aquaculture and Fisheries Department,Wageningen University and Research, P.O. Box 17 338,
6700 AHWageningen, The Netherlands; aad.smaal@wur.nl
* Correspondence: pauline.kamermans@wur.nl
Received: 29 August 2018; Accepted: 24 October 2018; Published: 30 October 2018
	

Abstract: The “Dutch Energy Agreement” motivates governments and industries to invest in
renewable energy sources, of which offshore wind energy is one of the solutions to meet the agreed
target of 16% of the total energy budget from renewable resources by 2023. An option for the multi-use
of wind farms is nature-inclusive building, in which the design and construction of wind farms make
use of the potential for co-design with oyster bed restoration. This can support the government’s
ambitions, for the Dutch North Sea, to achieve biodiversity goals, restore ecosystem functions, and
enhance ecosystem services, including future seafood production. For the recovery of flat oyster
(Ostrea edulis) beds, knowledge is required about the conditions under which active restoration
of this species in the North Sea can be successfully implemented. This paper gives a framework
and presents results to determine suitability of wind farms for flat oyster restoration, and provides
recommendations for pilot studies. Our analysis showed that a number of wind farms in the Dutch
section of the North Sea are suitable locations for development of flat oyster beds. Combining oyster
restoration and oyster culture, as a protein source, is a viable option worth investigating.
Keywords: Ostrea edulis; native oyster restoration; North Sea; site selection; pilot study; offshore
wind farms
1. Introduction
The “Dutch Energy Agreement”, a document by the Dutch government and dozens of
organizations and interest groups, presents the energy ambitions and targets up until 2023 and
beyond. This agreement motivates governments and industries to invest in renewable energy sources,
of which offshore wind energy is one of the solutions to meet the agreed 16% increase in the share
of renewable energy by 2023. Significant North Sea space is required to meet the future goals of the
energy transition, resulting in competition between current users, such as exploitation of oil and gas,
fisheries, nature, shipping, and the new wind farms. Current insights in multi-use options are still in
an exploratory phase, and policies are currently developed to support the multi-use of space.
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942; doi:10.3390/su10113942 308 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
Besides the goals set for energy arrangements, there is an increasing global demand for protein
and carbohydrate sources. The world population is likely to grow up to 9 billion people by 2050,
resulting in the need to provide proteins for all, of which fish and marine products can be part of [1].
Furthermore, alongside its contribution to protein intake, the value of fish is even stronger for poor
consumers because of its micro-nutrient and lipid content [1]. This trend requires a more flexible food
provision system and new sources. On the one hand, the current production, production methods,
and value chains should be assessed, improved, and optimized. This needs to coincide with the
arrangement of adapted locations and suitable space, as well as with an adequate governance strategy.
On the other hand, production of food and proteins needs to expand and/or convert to alternative
sources. Aquaculture is “projected to remain the fastest growing food commodity sector” [1]. As part
of this development, aquaculture in open marine systems is seen as a potential large-scale expansion
possibility [2,3]. The main reasons for global demand for seafood is the increase in world-population,
the increase of consumption per capita, as well as the increase in income [1,4]. Because limits in
the wild capture fisheries have been reached, with demand unable to be supported, aquaculture is
considered the major future seafood contributor [5,6].
Mariculture has a wide history in nearshore and inshore areas and estuarine environments. The
physical conditions and the relatively easy accessibility of these areas are the driving forces behind
their use. However, there are growing concerns about the impact on the environment [7,8], and
nearshore and inshore competition for space is setting limitations for the expansion or introduction
of aquaculture [9,10]. Therefore, the “blue revolution” (the remarkably fast expansion of marine
aquaculture and marine use in recent years) is set up to expand aquaculture practices in more exposed
open sea and offshore areas. New technologies provide further impulse for this expansion. For
example [11,12], investigated the potential of aquaculture for offshore seaweed and mussel farming in
the Dutch North Sea.
Gerty [13] reported that the potential of marine aquaculture is demonstrated in many parts of the
world. Worldwide the potential of development is far greater than the seafood demand, and expansion
for space is not limited in many offshore locations. However, locally the options are not always directly
suitable. The North Sea is a crowded and intensively used sea. Combinations of functions are therefore
welcome. Currently, the potential for multi-use functions of offshore platforms, including wind farms,
are under investigation worldwide [14,15]. One of the options is nature-inclusive construction, in
which the design and construction of wind farms include the potential to enhance biodiversity and
natural resources.
Until about a century ago, flat oyster beds constituted an important habitat in the North Sea.
The flat oyster was a key species that once existed in the North Sea ecosystem, a fact that has almost
disappeared from public memory. According to field surveys conducted in the 19th and early 20th
century, the North Sea harbored substantial areas of oyster beds in that time (over 25,000 km2, [16]
in [17,18]. However, by the end of the 19th century the flat oyster fishery became too intensive, which
caused the oyster population to decline rapidly [17,18]. By the beginning of the 20th century, the oyster
beds were already decimated [17]. Later, other types of bottom trawling fisheries also impacted on
the remaining beds. Other reasons for the decimation are not documented. As a result, the oyster
community, including related species, disappeared from the North Sea.
For the recovery of flat oyster (Ostrea edulis) beds, knowledge is required about the conditions
under which active restoration of this species in the North Sea can be successfully implemented. This
paper gives a framework and presents results to determine suitability of wind farms for flat oyster
restoration, and provides recommendations for pilot studies. The information is used to support the
marine spatial planning of wind farm and nature restoration.
1.1. Flat Oyster Bed Ecosystem Services in the North Sea
Several factors motivate flat oyster restoration in the North Sea. Flat oyster beds are a threatened
species and habitat (OSPAR, European Union (EU) Habitat Directive, biogenic reefs, EU Red List
309
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
of Species and Habitats). They once constituted a key element of a rich North Sea. Oyster beds
are some of the most striking structures in soft-sediment environments, providing many ecosystem
services, including the provision of habitat, which is important for biodiversity [19,20], pelagic–benthic
ecosystem coupling, shoreline stabilization, water quality regulation, and the enhancement of fishery
production [21–23]. There is a lack of knowledge on the ecosystem services provided by deep-water
flat oyster beds, as most studies have focused on the intertidal reefs of the Pacific oyster. Despite this,
some mechanisms are assumed to be generic for both species and environments. [24], for example,
demonstrated that the species facilitations function of the intertidal native European oyster bed is
similar to the invasive Pacific oyster (C. gigas) reefs.
Beds of the European oyster Ostrea edulis function as a habitat for many species (Figure 1). Beds
provide settlement substrate for epibenthic flora and fauna, food and shelter to mobile invertebrates
(e.g., crab, lobster, and shrimps), and fish can use the beds as shelter (particularly in the juvenile stage)
and spawning grounds (e.g., herring). The hard substrate, formed by the O. edulis shells, increases
in time through recruitment and growth, harboring higher species diversity than non-living hard
substrate [25].
Figure 1. Shells of the European oyster Ostrea edulis provide substrate for epibenthic flora and fauna.
Pictures by Youri van Es and Aad Smaal.
Oyster reefs, as ecosystem engineers, impact the benthic environment by altering the
biogeochemical and physical properties of the sediment, affecting community composition, abundance,
and species richness. As filter feeders, oysters enhance the pelagic–benthic ecosystem coupling
through the production of fecal and pseudofecal deposits, followed by mineralization [26,27], which
may stimulate phytoplankton turnover, enhancing primary production [28]. In addition, reefs of filter
feeders can concentrate and trap organic matter, which fuel local food webs (Figure 2). Concentration
of organic matter has been demonstrated for intertidal mixed blue mussel (Mytilus edulis) and Pacific
oyster reefs [29], deep reef structures of the cold-water coral Lophelia pertusa [30], and tubeworm
Lanice conchilega reefs [31]. De Smet et al. (2016) [31] demonstrated that L. conchilega can significantly
concentrate and trap organic matter, produced in an area no less than 15 times the reef area, within
their reef food web, resulting in a higher macrofaunal biomass and a more diverse food web than in
the absence of the reef.
Large beds of bivalves can also have a major effect on the local fine sediment dynamics [32,33].
The large expanses of oyster beds in the 19th century must have had a large-scale effect on turbidity in
the North Sea. The area of the old “oyster grounds” is characterized by relatively fine sediment [34],
which, under high wave conditions, can resuspend into the water column affecting light penetration. It
is to be expected that the presence of 25,000 km2 of oyster bed has affected these processes significantly.
To what extent the changes in light penetration may have also affected local primary production
is unknown.
310
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
Figure 2. In the presence of the filter feeder Ostrea edulis, in situ-produced and laterally advected
external phytoplankton dominate the carbon input into the bed, supporting a diverse-bed food web. In
bare sand areas, the carbon input is much lower and mainly based on in situ primary production by
microphytobenthos. Figure adapted from [31] De Smet et al. (2016).
Habitat formed by the oysters, combined with biodeposition, increases prey abundance, which
is the driving force for enhanced fish production. [22] quantitatively estimated enhanced fish and
mobile invertebrate production by oyster reefs. In the Gulf of Mexico, gross production was increased
with 397 g m−2 year−1 in the presence of oyster reefs [22]. Korringa (1954)] [35] reported about 250
species living in association with or on oyster beds. Hence, restoration would provide opportunities
for ecosystem services, such as the commercial exploitation of fish and mobile invertebrates, as well as
flat oysters themselves; provided that exploitation methods are developed that leave the flat oyster
beds intact. As a consequence, the loss of oyster beds leads to a less productive and less diverse
ecosystem and the loss of ecosystem services. In theWadden Sea, the disappearance of the flat oyster
beds resulted in a less diverse and productive mudflat ecosystem [36].
1.2. Policy
Restoring oyster beds will contribute to fulfil Dutch obligations, following from the Marine
Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD). The recovery of natural hard substrates, including flat oyster
beds, is an objective stated in the policy documents: Nature Ambition LargeWater Bodies [37]; and
the Implementation Agenda Natural Capital [38], under the title of shellfish beds in general; and in
recent OSPAR recommendations (OSPAR, 2013). Sustainable energy supply, robust nature, and climate
proof food supply are part of the Dutch Development Strategy for the North Sea (Noordzee 2050
Gebiedsagenda), and can potentially be realized with flat oyster restoration in wind farms.
Based on the European Common Fisheries Policy (CFP), a National Strategic Aquaculture
Plan 2014–2020 has been described for the stimulation of aquaculture in the Netherlands. Among
the prospects, the multi-use of space and offshore aquaculture have been identified as potentials
for development.
1.3. Food and Nutrition Security
The utilization of the ocean for food is not a new development. Fish and aquatic products are
long since the most traded food commodity in the world, whereby many seafood markets are global
markets (https://www.wto.org/english/res_e/reser_e/ersd201003_e.htm). In the last couple of years,
attention to fish and aquaculture products, and the contribution they make to food and nutrition
security, has grown [1,39,40]. In particular, special attention has been given to the contribution of
small-scale fisheries [41–43] and the importance of (small) fish for feeding the poor [44,45]. Furthermore,
in Europe, attention to the contribution of fish and aquatic products for food security has risen, mainly
as part of what has been called “blue growth”. The EU focusses on aquaculture when discussing blue
growth, as catches in fisheries are regarded as stabilized. The EU is currently the fourth largest fish
producer, after China, Indonesia, and India, and the largest trader (in value) of fishery and aquaculture
311
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
products in the world. Accordingly, the EU has quite an impact on fish trade and production (European
Market Observatory for Fisheries and Aquaculture Products EUMOFA). It also is the largest importer
of fish products, buying 60% of the fish and aquaculture products consumed from other countries
in the world (https://www.euractiv.com/section/global-europe/opinion/closing-the-net-the-eumust-
step-up-enforcement-of-seafood-import-controls/). Although, by doing so, the EU contributes,
indirectly, to the food security of people elsewhere in the world whose livelihoods rely on fisheries,
aquaculture, and trade. Due to the rising prices of seafood and the EU’s higher financial power, the EU
will eventually (and has already in some places (https://www.pri.org/stories/2018-03-30/senegalesewomen-
turn-exporting-fish-spite-local-shortages)), by safeguarding its own food security, impact on
the direct food security of people in other countries [46]. Thus, the more the EU can produce itself,
the better.
There are a couple of advantages of fish and aquatic products for food and protein, compared
to other sources, in terms of ecological impact: Fish and aquatic products have a relatively high
energy intensity compared to other food items [47]; the environmental costs, in terms of water
use, fertilizer use, pesticide use, antibiotic use, and soil loss, as well as greenhouse gasses per kg,
are much lower for marine resourced food compared to dairy and meat [48]; and bivalves show a
reduction of eutrophication (kg PO4 equivalent) compared to terrestrial derived meat and crops [49]
(Hall et al., 2011). In terms of impacting biodiversity, [48] has argued that capture fisheries are
sustained by maintaining semi-natural ecosystems, whereas agriculture relies on replacing natural
ecosystems with highly productive exotic species, and aquaculture falls somewhere in between
(https://rayhblog.files.wordpress.com/2012/10/hilborn-world-fisheries-congress.pdf). Thus, when
seeking opportunities to increase production of food, many turn to the ocean. It has also been
established that, until now, mostly the top of the aquatic trophic pyramid has been harvested, which in
fact is inefficient and less sustainable [50]. We could make much more use of the food potential of the
ocean if we also, but not solely, consume fish and marine products at lower levels in the food chain.
Flat oysters currently have a very high market value, due to the relatively low supply. If restoration
programs become a success, in terms of growth, survival, and reproduction of oyster beds, the return
of direct or indirect commercial exploitation may become possible. Currently an estimated 3000 km2 of
wind farm area is accommodated for wind farm production (up to 2023). If 0.1% of this area could be
used for oyster restoration, in combination with oyster production, a total of 300 ha is then available
for restoration in combination with food production (current production area is ~2.000 ha in The
Netherlands).
1.4. Wind Farm Suitability
In September 2014, the Dutch government designated three areas for the development of offshore
wind farms over the years to come: Borssele, Noord-Holland, and Zuid-Holland (Figure 3). In
the North Sea 2050 Spatial Agenda, the Ministries of Economic Affairs and Infrastructure and the
Environment expressed their ambition for the combined use of offshore space. This is included in the
environmental regulations and design regulations of the Wind Farm Site Decisions for next generation
wind farms. More specifically, the Ministry of Economic Affairs stated their wish to establish whether
the areas recently designated as offshore wind farm sites offer opportunities for the development
of flat oyster beds. The fact that wind farms are in the current regulatory framework, free from
seabed-disturbing activities, is regarded as a major precondition for the restoration of flat oyster
beds [17,51]. Oyster bed restoration appears to be a viable option to support these ambitions in the
Dutch North Sea, to simultaneously achieve biodiversity goals and restore and enhance ecosystem
services, including future seafood production.
312
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
Figure 3. Locations of existing and planned wind farms in the Dutch section of the North Sea (DSC:
Dutch Continental Shelf). The present study focusses on Borssele, Buitengaat/Gemini, offshore wind
farm Egmond aan Zee (OWEZ), Dutch coast South and North (HK-NH, HK-ZH), Luchterduinen,
Princes Amalia, and Zee-Energie. These wind farms are either in operation or are soon to be realized
from [52].
Current conditions may favor the return of the flat oyster in the North Sea. The flat oyster has
survived in estuaries around the North Sea (e.g., Limfjorden in Denmark, Lake Grevelingen and
Oosterschelde in the Netherlands, plus various inlets on the coast of the British Isles, Norway, and
Sweden). Recent records of individuals on shipwrecks, buoys, and marine wind farms in the North
Sea show that it can still survive, reproduce, and disperse in the open sea [53]. Newly installed
marine protected areas, wind farms, and offshore installations could provide sheltered areas that are
free from bottom trawling fisheries. Yet, without human assistance the oyster beds may not return
313
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
on a large scale. In the southern North Sea, the sea floor consists mainly of sand and silt, whereas
rocks are uncommon. Oyster larvae have a limited dispersal range and need hard substrate to settle
on [54,55], but without oysters, very little natural hard substrate has remained on the North Sea floor.
So, once the oyster beds are gone, they will probably not return on their own because the source
populations are too distant, even if the conditions are favorable. For the recovery of the flat oyster
beds, knowledge of the conditions under which the active restoration of this species in the North Sea
can be successfully implemented is required. To determine suitability of wind farms for flat oyster
restoration we developed a framework, which considered the life history and habitat preferences of
the species (Figure 4).
Figure 4. Schematic overview of the framework for site selection applied in the marine spatial planning
of nature restoration, with special application of Ostrea edulis in wind farms.
1.5. Life History
Mature flat oysters can switch between sexes to be male or female [56]. Generally, flat oysters
start as males and become females as they grow older. Older oysters can spawn twice during one
season, once as a male and once as a female. Sperm cells, clustered in spermatozeugmata [57], are
314
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
expelled through the exhalant siphon. Eggs remain in the mantle cavity of the female, where they
are fertilized and develop into larvae with two shells in a period of one to two weeks. When they are
released, the shell length of the larvae is 170–190 μm. During their free-swimming stage (another 8–30
days: [58] the length increases to 290–360 μm. Metamorphosis, from swimming larvae into sessile spat,
depends on food availability for the larvae. Settlement occurs when a suitable location is detected.
A drop of cement is produced and the left valve is glued to the surface. As a result of the relative
short free-swimming stage, compared to other bivalve species, the dispersal distance of O. edulis is
limited (on average 1 km [59]), although longer distances are occasionally possible during favorable
conditions (up to more than 10 km [60]). Oyster spat settles on hard substrates, such as stones, shell
fragments, or oyster shells. They adhere or fix themselves to the substrate and do not disperse further.
For spat collection, calcified tiles have been employed in many areas and are still in use in Arcachon
Bay (France). Oyster shells in existing oyster beds are a preferred settling substrate for oyster spat.
Oyster bed development is therefore a self-reinforcing process, due to the positive feedback of existing
oysters on successful recruitment and settlement (e.g., Eastern oyster [61]). It implies that oyster beds
have a critical mass below which recruitment may fail, due to limited substrate availability in relation
to the number of larvae produced [60,62].
2. Materials and Methods
The conditions for the long-term development of a flat oyster bed were largely determined by
four life-history variables: Survival, growth, reproduction, and recruitment. Reproduction referred to
the capacity to produce larvae; recruitment denoted the successful settlement of larvae in a specific
site. These four variables were influenced by a range of abiotic and biotic factors, which are listed in
Table 1. Survival depended on environmental factors such as large- and small-scale sea bed dynamics,
oxygen content, salinity, and predation. Growth was mainly determined by phytoplankton and the
concentration of suspended particles. Reproduction required a parent population in suitable age classes,
and the right water temperature for gonadal development and spawning. Recruitment depended on
water temperature, the quantity of larvae in a specific area, and the presence of suitable substrate for
settlement. Recruitment was determined by the size of the parent population that produced the larvae,
and served as larval settlement substrate, and by the water motion that determined larval retention in
a specific area (see also [63,64]).
Table 1. Environmental factors, relevant to the various life-history processes of O. edulis, used as site
selection criteria. The symbol (+) indicates a positive effect and (–) a negative effect.
Survival Growth Reproduction Recruitment
Sea bed shear stress –
Sea bed motion –
Concentration of suspended particles –
Larval retention +
Coarse sediment +
Tolerance ranges for abiotic and biotic environmental factors were derived from the literature
to evaluate the suitability of already present and planned wind farm areas in the Dutch North Sea
for flat oysters (Table 2). The wind farms under study were within the limits for the factors: Salinity,
water depth, water temperature, current velocity, food supply, and oxygen concentration [52]. The
selection criteria used were: Sea bed motion, bed shear stress, sediment composition, type of substrate,
concentration of suspended particles, and rate of larval dispersal and retention. Information on the
historical range of flat oysters in the North Sea (e.g., [16,17,51]) was used as an extra “habitat suitability
indicator” (Figure 5).
315
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
Table 2. Tolerance range and optimum of O. edulis for abiotic and biotic environmental factors. Adapted
from [65].
Environmental Factor Response Variable Range Optimum Reference
Temperature (◦C)
Survival adults <30 [66]
Growth adults
6–19 7–14 [66–68]
17 [69]
Gonad development 7–14 [68]
Survival and growth
larvae 10–31 25–27 [70]
Spat fall >18.5 [71]
Survival spat >3 [72]
Salinity (PSU)
Survival and growth
larvae 20–39.5 25–35 [73]
Growth adults >19 [74]
Water depth (m) Survival adults <–80 [75]
Current velocity (m/s) Survival adults <0.25 0.03 [76]
Sea bed motion (cm/day) Survival spat and adults <0.8 [77]
Sediment composition Survival adults Firm silty sand or silty
gravel with shells and stones [78]
Suspended matter
concentration (mg/L) Food intake <90 [79,80]
Food supply (chla ug/L) Gonad development 1.68 [81]
Oxygen concentration (mg/L) Survival adults >0.5 [82]
Figure 5. Map from Olsen’s Piscatorial Atlas [16], with the oyster range represented in brown.
316
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
2.1. Sea Bed Motion and Bed Shear Stress
Seabed dynamics can be described on different levels of scale. Therefore, a distinction was made
between bed mobility morphodynamics, which concerns bed dynamics on a larger scale, and bed
shear stress, as a measure of the force exerted by currents and waves on the bed. Bed shear stress is the
driving force for the formation of sand waves [83–85]. It also has a direct influence on the settlement
probability of shellfish larvae [86–88], as well as on the stability of the substrate on which they settle.
The threshold is determined by sediment grain size, sediment density, and the influence of biota
on sediment cohesion [89,90]. In a laboratory experiment, Grant et al. [77] demonstrated that low
concentrations of suspended sediment, when swirled up 0.1 cm/day, can contribute to nutrient intake
and, as such, have a positive effect on the growth speed of O. edulis, but that sediment churned up
to 0.8 cm per day reduces growth. Tolerance of sea bed motion of up to 0.8 cm/day was therefore
assumed in this study.
The southern North Sea, and particularly the Dutch continental shelf, is characterized by the
occurrence of sand waves [91,92]. These features can range in height from less than 1.5 m up to 10 m,
and can have a wave length of 100 to 1000 m. Under the influence of residual currents and waves,
these waves can move over the bed surface of the North Sea with speeds up to several meters per
year [93]. Although the average annual movement of sand waves is generally less than 0.8 cm/day,
movement is not constant throughout the year and is often mediated by strong wave conditions. Many
areas with migrating sand waves will, therefore, regularly experience sedimentation or erosion speeds
that exceed the tolerance levels of flat oyster beds. Figure 6 shows the sea bed structure and sea bed
motion features of the North Sea, as derived from the North Sea Atlas [94]. The effect of waves tends to
be the most powerful in shallow waters. In deep waters, waves do not reach the seabed. Wave energy
is often expressed as orbital velocity: the velocity of water just above the seabed caused by waves. The
extent to which wave energy reaches the seabed depends on the height of the waves and the depth of
the water. Waves are lower in coastal waters, but because these waters are shallow the orbital velocity
is high. Offshore waves are higher, but under normal conditions their effect only reaches the seabed
in shallower areas (such as the Dogger Bank). Orbital velocity and current velocity were both taken
into account in the Delft 3D model of the Southern North Sea, often used to calculate fine sediment
dynamics [95,96]. Comparison with the historical distribution of O. edulis (Figure 5) allowed us to
assume that areas where sea bed shear stress was less than 0.6 N/m2 were to be deemed suitable for
the development of flat oyster beds. Sea bed shear stress levels are presented in Figure 7.
317
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
Figure 6. Sea bed structure and motion (source: North Sea Atlas, [95]), and wind farm sites in the
Dutch section of the North Sea.
Figure 7. Average sea bed shear stress (in Pascal) in the North Sea, with combined effects of currents
and waves. Wind farm sites are indicated.
318
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
2.2. Concentration of Suspended Particles and Sediment Composition
The concentration of suspended particles is an important factor in oyster growth. Oysters filter
suspended matter from the water; this includes phytoplankton, detritus, and inorganic matter. The
oysters use the phytoplankton to fuel their growth, but they have no use for the inorganic material
in their metabolism. Higher concentrations of inorganic material will reduce the oysters’ capacity
for growth. This applies to most filter feeders, including flat oysters (e.g., [97]). Experiments have
confirmed that suspended particle concentration levels in excess of 90 mg/L strongly inhibit growth in
Pacific oysters (Crassostrea gigas) [80]. To our knowledge, no such experiments have been performed
for European oysters. Measurements in a field set-up by [98] have shown that the total concentration of
suspended matter just above the seabed (60 mg/L) is significantly higher than 80 cm above the seabed
(40 mg/L). This resulted in significantly lower filtration rates for O. edulis, although no significant
effect was found on the condition of the oysters after 15 months. Concentration of suspended particles
near the seabed was obtained from model calculations [96] and are presented in Figure 8.
Figure 8. Maximum concentrations of inorganic suspended particles (mg/L) near the seabed in Dutch
coastal waters, based on model simulation data. Wind farm sites are indicated.
Sediment composition is important as it determines substrate suitability for recruitment. First of
all, shells and existing oyster beds will promote recruitment. In the absence of shells and oyster beds,
sediment grain size is the most commonly used parameter. Sediment grain size is easy to measure.
Spatial patterns in the range of shellfish often correlate with sediment grain size, but there is little
evidence that this is the primary factor; other factors that co-vary with grain size are probably far
more important [99]. Water motion can have an impact on sediment composition because heavy
particles settle sooner than light ones. This is why silt tends to accumulate in sheltered spots, whereas
coarser sediment particles are found in exposed areas. As a rule, grain size varies according to the
average local current. [100] made a reconstruction of sediment composition along the Belgian coast,
as it was a hundred years ago, based on the results of the Gilson surveys of 1899 to 1914. In their
reconstruction, the seabed that accommodated extensive oyster beds before 1860 was described as
follows: A heterogeneous gravel field partially covered by a thin layer (<15 cm) of sand through which
bits of stone protruded. [101] studied factors that could explain the dispersal of Olympia oysters (Ostrea
lurida) in an estuary in California. Burial under a layer of fine sediment impeded the oysters’ survival
on small hard substrates. In areas with large amounts of silt, the oysters could only be found on large
319
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
rocks. In the northwestern part of the Mediterranean, oyster growth on shipwrecks is dominated by
Ostrea edulis [102]. Based on this dispersal data, coarse sand (grain size >210 μm) was classified as
unsuitable, fine sand (>63 μm) as moderately suitable, and firm silty sand, or silty gravel with shells
and stones (not defined in terms of grain size), was considered suitable for oyster growth [78]. Seabed
structure is presented in Figure 8.
2.3. Food Availability
Growth and survival of adult and larval oysters clearly depends on food supply. For benthic filter
feeders, food availability is driven by primary production as well as by transport (i.e., hydrodynamics).
Even in areas with very high productivity, stratification can limit the access of benthic filter feeders to
food supply [103,104]. The current wind farms, and the current potential wind farm areas, are in areas
relatively close to the coast with large nutrient input and, hence, high levels of primary production.
Additionally, in these areas, water is not stratified for prolonged periods of time, apart from close to
the western coast of the Netherlands, where the fresh water plume from the rivers Rhine and Meuse
have an influence [105]. However, these areas are shallow and highly productive. In the locations
under investigation in this study, food supply as well as oxygen depletion were not limiting for the
formation of oyster beds, although there may be limits on the carrying capacity of wind farm sites for
large beds. Other parts of the North Sea are characterized by prolonged periods of stratification [105],
which often coincide with oxygen depletion [106,107]. For these locations food availability as well as
oxygen dynamics need to be considered specifically.
2.4. Larval Dispersal and Retention
For an estimate of potential oyster larvae dispersal from various locations and the retention rate
within a certain area, a particle dispersal model was used (with the particles representing the larvae)
that was driven by water motion data from the Delft3D-FLOW model [95,108]. The three-dimensional
water motion was derived from the ZUNO-DD model [96]. Hydrodynamic data were available for the
years 2003 through 2011 on the following features: Water levels, current velocity, water temperature,
and salinity. The forcing functions for simulations, using the hydrodynamic model, were based on
actual data, such as river outflows, water temperature, and wind data. Because this data covered a
period of nine years, it covered the annual and inter-variability in hydrodynamic conditions. In this
study, the larvae were modelled as passive particles. The transport of these particles was driven by
water motion and by dispersal and diffusion processes. In the model, the age at which the larvae
settled was assumed to be ten days from the moment the larvae leave the mother oyster [109]. There
was no mortality until then. Larvae that are less than ten days old were unable to settle. Larvae were
removed from the model as soon as they were more than ten days old, and they played no further
role in the simulation. The particles entered into the model in a way that reflected data from actual
larval counts during the season [110], with the release of larvae from the middle of June to the middle
of August, and highest concentrations in the middle of July. The model did not present absolute
concentration figures, but offered proportional figures of larval concentration relative to the total
number of larvae generated in a specific period (Figure 9). The dispersal maps presented a picture
of larval dispersal in relative concentrations over the months June–August. Using colors, ranging
from dark green to yellow, to represent decreasing larval concentration levels, the maps showed that
larval retention in Borssele and the two northerly wind farms, Buitengaats and Zee-Energie, was much
higher than on the other wind farms along the Zuid- and Noord-Holland coast, which were subject
to the outflow of the Rhine and the northward current. Though the Borssele and Gemini sites did
experience tidal currents, the net current was relatively weak.
320
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 9. Cont.
321
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
() ()
(e) (f)
(g) (h)
Figure 9. Simulated larval dispersal over a 10-day period at wind farms: (a) Borssele; (b) HK-Zuid;
(c) Luchterduinen; (d) HK-Noord; (e) OWEZ; (f) Prinses Amalia; (g) Buitengaats; and (h) Zee-Energie.
The legend presents relative concentration values. This means that the figure presents dispersal rather
than absolute concentration figures.
322
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
2.5. Size of Parent Stock
“Critical mass” is defined as the quantity of oysters required to ensure a larval abundance that
is sufficient for potentially successful spat settlement and survival in the bed of origin. Estimates in
the literature as to the required critical mass are quite diverse. According to [60], a very large oyster
population in the North Sea is required—many tens of millions of individual oysters—if successful
recruitment is to be achieved in the North Sea and the Wadden Sea. This is linked to the openness of
these systems and the origin of the larvae, which, according to these authors, originate principally
from the English Channel. However, Smyth et al. (2016) [55] have demonstrated that following a
period of over-exploitation, a flat oyster population in Strangford Lough recovered on the basis of a
limited critical mass of flat oysters.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Wind Farm Selection
The various sites experienced different levels of sea bed shear stress, with the lowest values found
in the Gemini area and on the Zee-Energie and Buitengaats wind farms (Table 3). The values for the
habitat characteristics were retrieved from the maps shown in Figures 5–8, and were compared to the
tolerance range and optimum range for O. edulis presented in Table 2. This resulted in a score of two
(green, more suitable) when the values were within the optimal range, or one (orange, less suitable)
when the values were within the tolerance range but not optimal. For the historical occurrence, 2
indicated that it was within the historical range, and 1 indicated that it was not within the historical
range in that area. For larval retention, the locations scored a two when the map showed a relatively
small area of larval distribution, whereas the other locations scored a one.
At most wind farms, bed shear stress corresponded with sea bed sediment composition; the
seabed at Zee-Energie contained slightly larger amounts of silt. With respect to survival, the highest
scores were for Zee-Energie, Buitengaats, and Borssele, which were all relatively close to sites where
flat oysters occurred in the past (Table 3). The coastal sites attracted lower scores in terms of sea bed
shear stress, sediment composition, and historical range. Growth and reproduction mainly depended
on the availability of food, which was determined by the presence of phytoplankton and suspended
particles. Though phytoplankton was not seen as a limiting factor in the potential wind farm sites
analyzed in this study, suspended particles did qualify as an inhibitor. For that reason, to what extent
the levels of near-seabed suspended particles differ and have limiting effects was determined among
the various wind farm sites. Such an effect was found only at offshore wind farm Egmond aan Zee
(OWEZ), the site which was closest to the coast (Table 3). Regarding the chance of settlement, model
simulations showed that Buitengaats qualified for potentially successful recruitment, especially from a
relatively small parent population at Zee-Energie, aided by proximity and the net eastward current
(Table 3). The simulations also showed that the Prinses Amalia site should be able to serve as a source
for spat settlement in OWEZ.With a moderate population, the Borssele wind farm could see successful
recruitment within its boundaries; the same applies to Luchterduinen.
The analysis showed that Zee-Energie combined with Buitengaats were relatively suitable for
the development of oyster beds; Borssele was also deemed suitable, followed by Luchterduinen.
Luchterduinen also qualified as a pilot site because it was already in use and was favorably situated
from a logistics point of view. The shallower coastal sites also offered opportunities for developing flat
oyster beds, but the seabed in these locations was slightly less stable and they experienced more larval
outflow without immediately benefiting neighboring sites.
323
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
Table 3. Overview of relative suitability of wind farm sites for the development of flat oyster beds.
Numbers indicate relative suitability, 2 is more suitable than 1. The last column is the sum of all scores.
Wind Farm Sea Bed
Shear Stress Suspended Matter Sediment Historical
Occurrence
Larval
Retention Sum
avg max avg
Borssele 1 2 2 1 2 2 10
HK-Zuid 1 2 2 1 1 1 8
OWEZ 1 1 2 1 1 2 8
HK-Noord 1 2 2 1 1 1 8
Luchterduinen 1 2 2 1 1 2 9
Princes Amalia 1 2 2 1 1 1 8
Buitengaats 2 2 2 1 2 1 10
Zee-energie 2 2 2 2 2 2 12
3.2. Pilot Studies
Given the habitat characteristics of several wind farms in the Dutch section of the North Sea, some
of those sites, in principle, provide opportunities for the development of flat oyster beds. However,
information on the abundance of predators is lacking. In addition, it is unclear which critical population
size is required for a self-sustaining oyster bed. To verify actual suitability of offshore wind farms for
flat oyster restoration, empirical tests are needed before large-scale restoration efforts are started.
Uncertainties can be reduced by conducting pilot studies in the field to identify the most relevant
factors. Experiences gained in the pilot studies provide a basis for development of pilots in wind
farms in the Dutch North Sea, these include: Studies conducted by nature conservation organizations
ARK and WWF at the Dutch Voordelta [110–112], at Borkum Reef, and at the wind farm Gemini
in the Dutch North Sea (www.platteoester.nl); experiments carried out with flat oysters around
the North Sea (RESTORE project in Germany, https://www.awi.de/en/science/biosciences/shelfsea-
system-ecology/main-research-focus/european-oyster.html; Solent Oyster Restoration project
https://www.bluemarinefoundation.com/project/solent/); the Essex Native Oyster Restoration
Initiative (ENORI) (https://www.zsl.org/regions/uk-europe/thames-conservation/native-oysterrestoration),
both of which were carried out in England; the DEEP project in Scotland
(http://www.theglenmorangiecompany.com/about-us/deep/); and the Bivalve Project in Sweden.
The objective of such a pilot study could be formulated as follows: Conducting practical tests
of life history variables to establish (1) the extent to which flat oysters are able to survive, grow, and
reproduce on the chosen site; (2) whether the oyster bed is able to sustain itself through recruitment
(larval production and sufficient substrate for settlement); (3) the extent to which the oyster bed can
serve as a habitat for other species; and (4) which features within wind farms are most suitable to use
for restoration efforts.
In outline, the following approach could be pursued: (1) Create a source of larvae; and (2) provide
suitable substrate. To generate a source of larvae it is necessary to establish a minimum flat oyster
population with different age (= size) classes, of which a part is protected against predators. Oyster
development will have to be monitored during the growth and spawning seasons for survival, growth,
and gonad development. An effective way to study survival, growth, and reproduction is to install
cages with oysters for monitoring. During the spawning season, water samples can be taken to
establish the larval abundance. Spat collectors can be used to monitor larval settlement. Clean shell
materials (e.g., mussels and oysters) can be deposited at the pilot site during the period of peak larval
abundance to serve as substrate to promote the settlement of flat oyster larvae.
Additionally, morphodynamic developments need to be monitored. The scour protection around
turbines provides an area with hard substrate that may be suitable (or can be made suitable) for oyster
settlement. However, these constructions can often induce edge scour along the edges [113]. These
scour holes can be very dynamic and may prevent the expansion of an oyster bed. Whether this is a
limiting issue or not will depend on the local dynamics within wind farm locations. Another option in
324
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
a wind farm may be to utilize the protective layers over cable crossings. However, there remains a
major discussion on the requirements to decommission any anthropogenic structures in the North Sea
(OSPAR), which conflicts with the concept of long-term nature development strategies.
A combination of oyster culture and oyster restoration is an option. Off-bottom oyster growth
in the open sea has been demonstrated to be possible [114]. The oysters will spawn at least once
before they reach market size and are harvested. The larvae that are produced may be able to settle on
substrate placed on the bottom. This will enlarge the population of the natural bed. When the bed has
become larger than is needed to sustain itself, controlled harvest from the bottom can be investigated.
Oyster farmers may be interested in explorative experiments. Apart from off-bottom farming systems,
an area set aside for such activities and more robust ships are needed. At present, farmers are reluctant
to invest in equipment and new ships without guarantees for the long-term (e.g., 10 years) use of an
area. Possibilities for the government to allow such long-term experiments, and combined use of wind
farm service vessels, need to be explored.
4. Conclusions
Our analysis showed that a number of wind farms in the Dutch section of the North Sea are
suitable locations for flat oysters and for the development of flat oyster beds. This offers opportunities
for multi-use in the form of nature-inclusive construction and exploitation. It can support the
achievement of biodiversity goals, the restoration of ecosystem functions, and the enhancement of
ecosystem services, including future seafood production. To verify actual suitability of off shore wind
farms for flat oyster restoration, empirical tests are needed before large-scale restoration efforts can be
started. Pilots should focus on estimation of life history variables of the oysters, including survival,
growth, reproduction, and recruitment. In addition, expansion of the bed and self-sustainability, by the
positive feedback created from the provision of new settlement substrate by the newly established bed,
should be studied, as well as the enhancement of biodiversity in general and the increased production
of fish and large, mobile crustaceans in particular. Combining oyster restoration with oyster culture for
commercial purposes is a viable option worth investigating. It could be very productive, as cultivation
offers broodstock for larvae, which can expand and maintain the natural bed, and harvest adds to
food security.
Author Contributions: P.K. lead the writing of the manuscript and provided, together with T.M.v.d.H and A.C.S.,
biological information on O.edulis and its habitat. L.A.v.D. provided information and wrote on physical habitat
conditions and larval dispersal. F.K. provided larval dispersal model results. B.W. provided information and
wrote on goods and services of oyster beds. M.P. provided information and wrote on oyster aquaculture and M.K.
provided information and wrote on food security. The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Funding: Part of this study was funded by the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs, project code: BO-11018.
Writing of the manuscript was supported by the Wageningen Research project KB22.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Béné, C.; Barange, M.; Subasinghe, R.; Pinstrup-Andersen, P.; Merino, G.; Hemre, G.; Williams, M. Feeding 9
billion by 2050 Putting fish back on the menu. Food Secur. 2015, 7, 261–274. [CrossRef]
2. Lovatelli, A.; Aguilar-Manjarrez, J.; Soto, D. (Eds.) Expanding Mariculture Farther Offshore—Technical,
Environmental, Spatial and Governance Challenges; FAO Technical Workshop, FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture
Proceedings No. 24; Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO): Rome, Italy, 2013;
p. 73.
3. Rubino, M.C. Offshore Aquaculture in the United States: Economic Considerations, Implications and Opportunities;
Technical Memorandum NMFS F/SPO-103; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration: Silver
Spring, MD, USA, 2008.
325
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
4. Godfray, H.C.J.; Beddington, J.R.; Crute, I.R.; Haddad, L.; Lawrence, D.; Muir, J.F.; Pretty, J.; Robinson, S.;
Thomas, S.M.; Toulmin, C. Food Security: The Challenge of Feeding 9 Billion People. Science 2010, 327,
812–818. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Costello, C.; Ovando, D.; Clavelle, T.; Strauss, C.K.; Hilborn, R.; Melnychuk, M.C.; Branch, T.A.; Gaines, S.D.;
Szuwalski, C.S.; Cabral, R.B.; et al. Global fishery prospects under contrasting management regimes. PNAS
2016, 113, 5125–5129. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Goldberg, R.; Naylor, R. Future seascapes, fishing and fish farming. Front. Ecol. Environ. 2005, 3, 21–28.
[CrossRef]
7. Borja, Á.; Rodríguez, J.G.; Black, K.; Bodoy, A.; Emblow, C.; Fernandes, T.F.; Forte, J.; Karakassis, I.; Muxika, I.;
Nickell, T.D.; et al. Assessing the suitability of a range of benthic indices in the evaluation of environmental
impact of fin and shellfish aquaculture located in sites across Europe. Aquaculture 2009, 293, 231–240. [CrossRef]
8. Read, P.; Fernandes, T. Management of environmental impacts of marine aquaculture in Europe. Aquaculture
2003, 226, 139–163. [CrossRef]
9. Lester, S.E.; Stevens, J.M.; Gentry, R.R.; Kappel, C.V.; Bell, T.W.; Costello, C.J.; Gaines, S.D.; Kiefer, D.A.;
Maue, C.C.; Rensel, J.E.; et al. Marine spatial planning makes room for offshore aquaculture in crowded
coastal waters. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 945. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Sarà, G.; Mangano, M.C.; Johnson, M.; Mazzola, A. Integrating multiple stressors in aquaculture to build the
blue growth in a changing sea. Hydrobiologia 2018, 809, 5–17. [CrossRef]
11. Van den Burg, S.W.K.; Kamermans, P.; Blanch, M.; Pletsas, D.; Poelman, M.; Soma, K.; Dalton, G. Business
case for mussel aquaculture in offshore wind farms in the North Sea. Mar. Policy 2017. [CrossRef]
12. Jansen, H.M.; van den Burg, S.; Bolman, B.; Jak, R.G.; Kamermans, P.; Poelman, M.; Stuiver, M. The feasibility
of offshore aquaculture and its potential for multi-use in the North Sea. Aquacult. Int. 2016. [CrossRef]
13. Gentry, R.R.; Froehlich, H.E.; Grimm, D.; Kareiva, P.; Parke, M.; Rust, M.; Gaines, S.D.; Halpern, B.S. Mapping
the global potential for marine aquaculture. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 2017, 1, 1317–1324. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Pirlet, H.; Claus, S.; Copejans, E.D.C.E.; Guanche García, R.; Møhlenberg, F.; Rappé, K.; Schouten, J.-J.;
Zanuttigh, B. The Mermaid Project—Innovative Multi-Purpose Offshore Platforms; Flanders Marine Institute
(VLIZ): Ostend, Belgium, 2014; p. 20.
15. Quevedo, E.; Delory, E.; Castro, A.; Llinás, O.; Hernández, J. Modular multi-purpose offshore platforms, the
TROPOS project approach. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Ocean Energy, Dublin,
Ireland, 17–19 October 2012.
16. Olsen, O.T. The Piscatorial Atlas of the North Sea, English and St. George’s Channels; Grimsby: London, UK, 1883.
17. Gercken, J.; Schmidt, A. Current Status of the European Oyster (Ostrea edulis) and Possibilities for Restoration in
the German North Sea 2014; BFN Report; Bundesamt für Naturschutz: Bonn, Germany, 2014.
18. Houziaux, J.-S.; Kerckhof, F.; Degrendele, K.; Roche, M.; Norro, A. The Hinder Banks Yet an Important
Region for the Belgian Marine Biodiversity? Final Report HINDERS Project; Belgian Science Policy Office:
Brussels, Belgium, 2008; p. 249. Available online: http://www.belspo.be/belspo/home/publ/pub_ostc/
EV/rappEV45_en.pdfS (accessed on 28 August 2018).
19. Bruno, J.F.; Stachowicz, J.J.; Bertness, M.D. Inclusion of facilitation into ecological theory. Trends Ecol. Evol.
2003, 18, 119–125. [CrossRef]
20. Bouma, T.J.; Olenin, S.; Reise, K.; Ysebaert, T. Ecosystem engineering and biodiversity in coastal sediments:
Posing hypotheses. Helgol. Mar. Res. 2009, 63, 95–106. [CrossRef]
21. Lenihan, H.S.; Peterson, C.H. How habitat degradation through fishery disturbance enhances impacts of
hypoxia on oyster reefs. Ecol. Appl. 1998, 8, 128–140. [CrossRef]
22. zu Ermgassen, P.S.E.; Grabowski, J.H.; Gair, J.R.; Powers, S.P. Quantifying fish and mobile invertebrate
production from a threatened nursery habitat. J. Appl. Ecol. 2016, 53, 596–606. [CrossRef]
23. Baggett, L.P.; Powers, S.P.; Brumbaugh, R.; Coen, L.D.; DeAngelis, B.; Greene, J.; Hancock, B.; Morlock, S.
Oyster Habitat Restoration Monitoring and Assessment Handbook; The Nature Conservancy: Arlington, VA, USA,
2014; 96p, Available online: http://www.oyster-restoration.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Oyster-
Habitat-Restoration-Monitoring-and-Assessment-Handbook.pdf (accessed on 28 August 2018).
24. Zwerschke, N.; Emmerson, M.C.; Roberts, D.; O’Connor, N.E. Benthic assemblages associated with native
and non-native oysters are similar. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2016, 111, 305–310. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
326
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
25. Smyth, D.; Roberts, D. The European oyster (Ostrea edulis) and its epibiotic succession. Hydrobiologia 2010,
655, 25–36. [CrossRef]
26. Newell, R.I.E. Ecosystem influences of natural and cultivated populations of suspension-feeding bivalve
molluscs: A review. J. Shellfish Res. 2004, 23, 51–61.
27. Kellogg, M.L.; Cornwell, J.C.; Owens, M.S.; Paynter, K.T. Denitrification and nutrient assimilation on a
restored oyster reef. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 2013, 480, 1–19. [CrossRef]
28. Dame, R.F.; Prins, T. Bivalve carrying capacity in coastal ecosystems. Aquat. Ecol. 1997, 31, 409–421. [CrossRef]
29. Van der Zee, E.; Heide, T.; Donadi, S.; Eklöf, J.; Eriksson, B.; Olff, H.; Veer, H.; Piersma, T. Spatially extended
habitat modification by intertidal reef-building bivalves has implications for consumer-resource interactions.
Ecosystems 2012, 15, 664–673. [CrossRef]
30. Van Oevelen, D.; Duineveld, G.; Lavaleye, M.; Mienis, F.; Soetaert, K.; Heip, C.H.R. The cold-water coral
community as a hot spot for carbon cycling on continental margins: A food-web analysis from Rockall Bank
(northeast Atlantic). Limnol. Oceanogr. 2009, 54, 1829–1844. [CrossRef]
31. De Smet, B.; van Oevelen, D.; Vincx, M.; Vanaverbeke, J.; Soetaert, K. Lanice conchilega structures carbon
flows in soft-bottom intertidal areas. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 2016, 552, 47–60. [CrossRef]
32. Van der Heide, T.; Tielens, E.; van der Zee, E.M.;Weerman, E.J.; Holthuijsen, S.; Eriksson, B.K.; Piersma, T.;
van de Koppel, J.; Olff, H. Predation and habitat modification synergistically interact to control bivalve
recruitment on intertidal mudflats. Boil. Conserv. 2014, 172, 163–169. [CrossRef]
33. Ysebaert, T.; Hart, M.; Herman, P.M.J. Impacts of bottom and suspended cultures of mussels Mytilus spp. on
the surrounding sedimentary environment and macrobenthic biodiversity. Helgol. Mar. Res. 2009, 63, 59–74.
[CrossRef]
34. Puls,W.; Sündermann, J. Simulation of Suspended Sediment Dispersion in the North Sea. In Residual Currents
and Long-Term Transport; Coastal and Estuarine Studies; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 1990; Volume 38.
35. Korringa, P. The shells of Ostrea edulis as a habitat. Arch. Neerl. Zoöl. 1954, 10, 32–146. [CrossRef]
36. Reise, K.; Beusekom, J.E.E. Interactive effects of global and regional change on a coastal ecosystem. Helgol.
Mar. Res. 2008, 62, 85–91. [CrossRef]
37. Ministry of Economic Affairs. 2014 Nature Ambition LargeWater Bodies. Available online: www.minez.nl
(accessed on 28 August 2018).
38. Ministry of Economic Affairs. 2013 Implementation Agenda Natural Capital. Available online: www.minez.
nl (accessed on 28 August 2018).
39. High Level Panel of Experts. Sustainable Fisheries and Aquaculture for Food Security and Nutrition: A Report
by the High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee on World Food Security; FAO:
Rome, Italy, 2014.
40. Golden, C.D.; Allison, E.H.; Cheung, W.W.L.; Dey, M.M.; Halpern, B.S.; McCauley, D.J. Nutrition: Fall in fish
catch threatens human health. Nature 2016, 534, 317–320. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41. Allison, E.H.; Béné, C.; Andrew, N.L. Poverty reduction as a means to enhance resilience in small-scale
fisheries. In Small-Scale Fisheries Management—Frameworks and Approaches for the Developing World;
Pomeroy, R.S., Andrew, N.L., Eds.; CABI:Wallingford, UK, 2011; pp. 216–238.
42. Béné, C.; Arthur, R.; Norbury, H.; Allison, E.H.; Beveridge, M.; Bush, S.; Campling, L.; Leschen, W.; Little, D.;
Squires, D.; et al. Contribution of fisheries and aquaculture to food security and poverty reduction: Assessing
the current evidence. World Dev. 2016, 79, 177–196. [CrossRef]
43. Beveridge, M.C.M.; Thilsted, S.H.; Phillips, M.J.; Metian, M.; Troell, M.; Hall, S.J. Meeting the food and
nutrition needs of the poor: The role of fish and the opportunities and challenges emerging from the rise of
aquaculture. J. Fish Boil. 2013, 83, 1067–1084. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Kolding, J.; van Zwieten, P.; Marttin, F.; Poulain, F. Fisheries in the Drylands of Sub-Sahara. Fish Come with
the Rains; Building Resilience for Fisheries Dependant Livelihoods to Enhance Food Security and Nutrition
in the Drylands; FAO Report FIAF/FIAP/C1118(En).7; Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO): Rome, Italy, 2016.
45. Bogard, J.R.; Thilsted, S.H.; Marks, G.C.; Abdul Wahab, M.; Hossain, M.A.R.; Jakobsen, J.; Stangoulis, J.
Nutrient composition of important fish species in Bangladesh and potential contribution to recommended
nutrient intakes. J. Food Compos. Anal. 2015, 42, 120–133. [CrossRef]
327
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
46. Kurien, J. Responsible Fish Trade and Food Security; FAO Fisheries Technical Paper 456; Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO): Rome, Italy, 2005.
47. Pelletier, N.; Audsley, E.; Brodt, S.; Garnett, T.; Henriksson, P.; Kendall, A.; Kramer, K.J.; Murphy, D.;
Nemecek, T.; Troell, M. Energy Intensity of Agriculture and Food Systems. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 2011,
36, 223–246. [CrossRef]
48. Hilborn, R.; Tellier, P. The Environmental Cost of N. Z. Food Production; New Zealand Seafood Industry Council
Ltd.: Wellington, New Zealand, 2012; ISBN 978-0473-17824-6.
49. Hall, S.J.; Delaporte, A.; Phillips, M.J.; Beveridge, M.; O’Keefe, M. Blue Frontiers: Managing the Environmental
Costs of Aquaculture; The WorldFish Center: Penang, Malaysia, 2011.
50. Garcia, S.M.; Kolding, J.; Rice, J.; Rochet, M.J.; Zhou, S.; Arimoto, T.; Beyer, J.E.; Borges, L.; Bundy, A.;
Dunn, D. Reconsidering the consequences of selective fisheries. Science 2012, 335, 1045–1047. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
51. Smaal, A.C.; Kamermans, P.; van der Have, T.M.; Engelsma, M.; Sas, H.W.J. Feasibility of Flat Oyster (Ostrea
edulis) Restoration in the Dutch Part of the North Sea; IMARES Report C028/15; IMARES Wageningen UR:
Ijmuiden, The Netherlands, 2015.
52. Smaal, A.; Kamermans, P.; Kleissen, F.; van Duren, L.; van der Have, T. Flat Oysters on Offshore Wind Farms.
Opportunities for the Development of flat Oyster Populations on Existing and Planned Wind Farms in the Dutch
Section of the North Sea; Wageningen Marine Research Rapport C052/17; Wageningen Marine Research:
Yerseke, The Netherlands, 2017.
53. Kerckhof, F.; Coolen, J.W.P.; Rumes, B.; Degraer, S. Recent findings of wild European flat oysters Ostrea edulis
(Linnaeus, 1758) in Belgian and Dutch offshore waters: New perspectives for offshore oyster reef restoration
in the southern North Sea Belgian. J. Zoöl. 2018. [CrossRef]
54. Burke, K.; Bataller, É.; Miron, G. Spat collection of a non-native bivalve species (European oyster, Ostrea
edulis) off the Eastern Canadian coast. J. Shellfish Res. 2008, 27, 345–353. [CrossRef]
55. Smyth, D.; Mahon, A.M.; Roberts, D.; Kregting, L. Settlement of Ostrea edulis is determined by the availability
of hard substrata rather than by its nature: Implications for stock recovery and restoration of the European
oyster. Aquat. Conserv. Mar. Freshw. Ecosyst. 2018. [CrossRef]
56. Walne, P.R. Culture of Bivalve moLluscs: 50 Years of Experience at Conwy; Fishing News Books Ltd.: Farnham,
UK, 1974; 189p.
57. O’Foighil, D. Role of spermatozeugmata in the spawning ecology of the brooding oyster Ostrea edulis. Gamete
Res. 1989, 24, 219–228. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Muus, B.J.; Dahlstrom, P. Meeresfische; BLV: Munchen, Germany, 1973.
59. Jackson, A. Ostrea edulis. Native oyster. Marine Life Information Network: Biology and Sensitivity Key Information
Sub-Programmem [on-line]; Marine Biological Association: Plymouth, UK, 2007.
60. Berghahn, R.; Ruth, M. The disappearance of oysters from theWadden Sea: A cautionary tale for no-take
zones. Aquat. Conserv. Mar. Freshw. Ecosyst. 2005, 15, 91–104. [CrossRef]
61. Jordan-Cooley, W.C.; Lipcius, R.N.; Shaw, L.B.; Shen, J.; Shi, J. Bistability in a differential equation model of
oyster population and sediment volume. J. Theor. Boil. 2011, 289, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Kennedy, R.J.; Roberts, D. Commercial oyster stocks as a potential source of larvae in the regeneration of
Ostrea edulis in Strangford Lough, Northern Ireland. JMBA 2006, 86, 153–159. [CrossRef]
63. Vera, M.; Carlsson, J.; Carlsson, J.E.L.; Cross, T.; Lynch, S.; Kamermans, P.; Villalba, A.; Culloty, S.; Martinez, P.
Current genetic status, temporal stability and structure of the remnant wild European flat oyster populations:
Conservation and restoring implications. Mar. Biol. 2016, 163, 239. [CrossRef]
64. Smyth, D.; Kregting, L.; Elsäßer, B.; Kennedy, R.; Roberts, D. Using particle dispersal models to assist in the
conservation and recovery of the overexploited native oyster (Ostrea edulis) in an enclosed sea lough. JSR
2016, 108, 50–59. [CrossRef]
65. Capelle, J.J. Restoration of the Oyster Ostrea edulis L. in theWadden Sea;Wageningen IMARES, Rapport; IMARES:
Yerseke, The Netherlands, 2008; p. 61.
66. Haure, J.; Penisson, C.; Bougrier, S.; Baud, J.P. Influence of temperature on clearance and oxygen consumption
rates of the flat oyster Ostrea edulis: Determination of allometric coefficients. Aquaculture 1998, 169, 211–224.
[CrossRef]
328
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
67. Newell, R.C.; Johnson, L.G.; Kofoed, L.H. Adjustment of the components of energy balance in response to
temperature change in Ostrea edulis. Oecologia 1977, 30, 97–110. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. Lubet, P. Ecophysiologie de la reproduction chez les mollusques lamellibranches. Haliotis 1976, 7, 49–55.
69. Buxton, C.D.; Newell, R.C.; Field, J.G. Response-Surface Analysis of the Combined Effects of Exposure and
Acclimation Temperatures on Filtration, Oxygen Consumption and Scope for Growth in the Oyster. Mar.
Ecol. Prog. Ser. 1981, 6, 73–82. [CrossRef]
70. Davis, H.C.; Calabrese, A. Survival and growth of larvae of the European oyster (Ostrea edulis L.) at different
temperatures. Boil. Bull. 1969, 136, 193–199. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71. Hoek, P.P.C. Rapport Over de Oorzaken van den Achteruitgang in Hoedanigheid van de Zeeuwsche oester; Ministerie
vanWaterstaat, Handel en Nijverheid: ‘s-Gravenhage, The Netherlans, 1902.
72. Child, A.R.; Laing, I. Comparative low temperature tolerance of small juvenile European, Ostrea edulis L.;
Pacific oysters, Crassostrea gigas Thunberg. Aquac. Res. 1998, 29, 103–113. [CrossRef]
73. Davis, H.C.; Ansell, A.D. Survival and growth of larvae of the European oyster (Ostrea edulis L.) at lowered
salinities. Boil. Bull. 1962, 122, 33–39. [CrossRef]
74. Hutchinson, S.; Hawkins, L.E. Quantification of the physiological responses of the European flat oyster,
Ostrea edulis L. to temperature and salinity. J. Molluscan Stud. 1992, 58, 215–226. [CrossRef]
75. Hayward, P.J.; Ryland, J.S. Handbook of the Marine Fauna of North-West Europe; Oxford University Press: New
York, NY, USA, 1998.
76. Drinkwaard, A.C. Current velocity as an ecological factor in shell growth of Ostrea edulis. ICES Shellfish
Committee 1961, 47, 1–3.
77. Grant, J.; Enright, C.T.; Griswold, A. Resuspension and growth of Ostrea edulis: A field experiment. Mar. Boil.
1990, 104, 51–59. [CrossRef]
78. Tillin, H.M.; Hull, S.C. Tools for Appropriate Assessment of Fishing and Aquaculture Activities in Marine and
Coastal Natura 2000 Sites; Report VII: Intertidal and Subtidal Reefs, Report No. R. 2074; ABPmer for the
Marine Institute: Galway, Ireland, 2013.
79. Hawkins, A.J.S.; Bayne, B.L.; Bougrier, S.; Héral, M.; Iglesias, J.I.P.; Navarro, E.; Smith, R.F.M.; Urrutia, M.B.
Some general relationships in comparing the feeding physiology of suspensionfeeding bivalve molluscs.
J. Exp. Mar. Boil. Ecol. 1998, 219, 87–103. [CrossRef]
80. Barillé, L.; Prou, J.; Heral, M.; Razet, D. Effects of high natural seston concentrations on the feeding, selection,
and absorption of the oyster Crassostrea gigas Thunberg. JEMBE 1997, 2012, 149–172. [CrossRef]
81. Millican, P.F.; Helm, M.M. Effects of nutrition on larvae production in the European flat Oyster, Ostrea edulis.
Aquaculture 1994, 123, 83–94. [CrossRef]
82. Davis, J.C. Minimal Dissolved Oxygen Requirements of Aquatic Life with Emphasis on Canadian Species: A
Review. J. Fish. Board Can. 1975, 32, 2295–2332. [CrossRef]
83. Borsje, B.W.; Bouma, T.J.; Rabaut, M.; Herman, P.M.J.; Hulscher, S.J.M.H. Formation and erosion of
biogeomorphological structures: A model study on the tube-building polychaete Lanice conchilega. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 2014, 59, 1297–1309. [CrossRef]
84. Buijsman, M.C.; Ridderinkhof, H. Long-term evolution of sand waves in the Marsdiep inlet. II: Relation to
hydrodynamics. Cont. Shelf Res. 2008, 28, 1202–1215. [CrossRef]
85. Dorst, L.L.; Roos, P.C.; Hulscher, S.J.M.H.; Lindenbergh, R.C. The estimation of sea floor dynamics from
bathymetric surveys of a sand wave area. J. Appl. Geodesy 2009, 3, 97–120. [CrossRef]
86. Abelson, A.; Weihs, D.; Loya, Y. Hydrodynamic impediments to settlement of marine propagules, and
adhesive-filament solutions. Limnol. Oceanogr. 1994, 39, 164–169. [CrossRef]
87. Crimaldi, J.P.; Thompson, J.K.; Rosman, J.H.; Lowe, R.J.; Koseff, J.R. Hydrodynamics of larval settlement:
The influence of turbulent stress events at potential recruitment sites. Limnol. Oceanogr. 2002, 47, 1137–1151.
[CrossRef]
88. Hendriks, I.E.; van Duren, L.A.; Herman, P.M.J. Turbulence levels in a flume compared to the field. J. Sea Res.
2006, 55, 15–29. [CrossRef]
89. Grabowski, R.C.; Droppo, I.G.; Wharton, G. Erodibility of cohesive sediment: The importance of sediment
properties. Earth-Sci. Rev. 2011, 105, 101–120. [CrossRef]
90. Wright, L.D.; Schaffner, L.C.; Maa, J.P.-Y. Biological mediation of bottom boundary layer processes and
sediment suspension in the lower Chesapeake Bay. Mar. Geol. 1997, 141, 27–50. [CrossRef]
329
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
91. McCave, I.N. Sand waves in the North Sea off the coast of Holland. Mar. Geol. 1971, 10, 199–225. [CrossRef]
92. Van Dijk, T.A.G.P.; Kleinhans, M.G. Processes controlling the dynamics of compound sand waves in the
North Sea, Netherlands. J. Geophys. Res. Earth Surf. 2005, 110. [CrossRef]
93. Damen, J.M.; van Dijk, T.A.G.P.; Hulscher, S.J.M.H. Spatially Varying Environmental Properties Controlling
Observed Sand Wave Morphology. J. Geophys. Res. 2018, 123, 19. [CrossRef]
94. ICONA. Noordzeeatlas Voor Het Nederlandse Beleid en Beheer; ICONA Den Haag; Stadsuitgeverij: Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, 1992.
95. Gerritsen, H.; Vos, R.J.; Van Der Kaaij, T.; Lane, A.; Boon, J.G. Suspended sediment modelling in a shelf sea
(North Sea). Coast. Eng. 2000, 41, 317–352. [CrossRef]
96. Van der Kaaij, T.; van Kessel, T.; Troost, T.; van Duren, L.A.; Villars, M.T. Modelondersteuning MER Winning
Suppletie- en Ophoogzand Noordzee 2018–2027; Modelvalidatie 1230888-002; Deltares: Delft, The Netherlands,
2017.
97. Laing, I.; Walker, P.; Areal, F. A Feasibility Study of Native Oyster (Ostrea edulis) Stock Regeneration in the United
Kingdom; CARD Project Report FC1016; Centre for Environment, Fisheries & Aquaculture Science: Lowestoft,
UK, 2005.
98. Sawusdee, A.; Jensen, A.C.; Collins, K.J.; Hauton, C. Improvements in the physiological performance of
European flat oysters Ostrea edulis (Linnaeus, 1758) cultured on elevated reef structures: Implications for
oyster restoration. Aquaculture 2015, 444, 41–48. [CrossRef]
99. Snelgrove, P.V.R.; Butman, C.A. Animal-sediment relationships revisited: Cause versus effect. Oceanogr. Mar.
Boil. Annu. Rev. 1994, 32, 111–177.
100. Houziaux, J.-S.; Fettweis, M.; Francken, F.; van Lancker, V. Historic (1900) seafloor composition in the
Belgian–Dutch part of the North Sea: A reconstruction based on calibrated visual sediment descriptions.
Cont. Shelf Res. 2011, 31, 1043–1056. [CrossRef]
101. Wasson, K. Informing Olympia Oyster Restoration: Evaluation of Factors That Limit Populations in a
California Estuary. Wetlands 2010, 30, 449–459. [CrossRef]
102. Peirano, A. Wrecks on the Bottom: Useful, Ecological Sentinels? Mar. Technol. Soc. J. 2013, 47, 118–127.
[CrossRef]
103. Petersen, J.K.; Maar, M.; Ysebaert, T.; Herman, P.M.J. Near-bed gradients in particles and nutrients above a
mussel bed in the Limfjorden: Influence of physical mixing and mussel filtration. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 2013,
490, 137–146. [CrossRef]
104. Wiles, P.J.; van Duren, L.A.; Haese, C.; Larsen, J.; Simpson, J.H. Stratification and mixing in Limfjorden in
relation to mussel culture. J. Mar. Syst. 2006, 60, 129–134. [CrossRef]
105. Van Leeuwen, S.; Tett, P.; Mills, D.; van der Molen, J. Stratified and nonstratified areas in the North Sea:
Long-term variability and biological and policy implications. J. Geophys. Res. 2015, 120, 4670–4686. [CrossRef]
106. Greenwood, N.; Parker, E.R.; Fernand, L.; Sivyer, D.B.;Weston, K.; Painting, S.J.; Kröger, S.; Forster, R.M.;
Lees, H.E.; Mills, D.K.; et al. Detection of low bottom water oxygen concentrations in the North Sea;
implications for monitoring and assessment of ecosystem health. Biogeosciences 2010, 7, 1357–1373. [CrossRef]
107. Queste, B.Y.; Fernand, L.; Jickells, T.D.; Heywood, K.J.; Hind, A.J. Drivers of summer oxygen depletion in
the central North Sea. Biogeosciences 2016, 13, 1209–1222. [CrossRef]
108. Cronin, K.; Plieger, R.; Gaytan Aguilar, S.; de Lima Rego, J.R.; Blaas, M. MoS2-II: Deterministic Model
Calibration: Updates of the ZUNO-DD Hydrodynamic and SPM Model Deltares Report; Rep. No. 1204561;
Deltares: Delft, The Netherlands, 2013.
109. Korringa, P. Relations between the Moon and Periodicity in the Breeding of Marine Animals. Ecol. Monogr.
1947, 17, 347–381. [CrossRef]
110. Sas, H.; Kamermans, P.; van der Have, T.; Lengkeek,W.; Smaal, A. Shellfish Reef Restoration Pilots, Voordelta,
The Netherlands; Annual Report; ARK Natuurontwikkeling: Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2016.
111. Sas, H.; Kamermans, P.; van der Have, T.; Christianen, M. Shellfish reef Restoration Pilots, Voordelta, The
Netherlands; Annual Report; ARK Natuurontwikkeling: Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2017.
112. Christianen, M.J.A.; Bergsma, J.H.; Coolen, J.W.P.; Didderen, K.; Dorenbosch, M.; Driessen, F.M.F.;
Kamermans, P.; Reuchlin-Hugenholtz, E.; Sas, H.; Smaal, A.; et al. Return of the native facilitated by
the invasive? Population composition, substrate preferences and epibenthic species richness of a recently
discovered shellfish reef with native European flat oysters (Ostrea edulis) in the North Sea. Mar. Boil. Res.
2018, 14, 590–597. [CrossRef]
330
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3942
113. Petersen, T.U.; Mutlu Sumer, B.; Fredsøe, J.; Raaijmakers, T.C.; Schouten, J.J. Edge scour at scour protections
around piles in the marine environment—Laboratory and field investigation. Coast. Eng. 2015, 106, 42–72.
[CrossRef]
114. Pogoda, B.; Buck, B.H.; Hagen,W. Growth performance and condition of oysters (Crassostrea gigas and Ostrea
edulis) farmed in an offshore environment (North Sea, Germany). Aquaculture 2011, 319, 484–492. [CrossRef]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
331
sustainability
Article
Macroeconomic Impacts of Climate Change Driven
by Changes in Crop Yields
Shinichiro Fujimori 1,2,*, Toshichika Iizumi 3, Tomoko Hasegawa 2, Jun’ya Takakura 2,
Kiyoshi Takahashi 2 and Yasuaki Hijioka 2
1 Department of Environmental Engineering, Kyoto University, Kyoto 615-8540, Japan
2 Center for Social and Environmental Systems Research, National Institute for Environmental Studies,
Tsukuba 305-8506, Japan; hasegawa.tomoko@nies.go.jp (T.H.); takakura.junya@nies.go.jp (J.T.);
ktakaha@nies.go.jp (K.T.); hijioka@nies.go.jp (Y.H.)
3 Institute for Agro-Environmental Sciences, National Agriculture and Research Organization,
Tsukuba 305-8604, Japan; iizumit@affrc.go.jp
* Correspondence: sfujimori@athehost.env.kyoto-u.ac.jp; Tel.: +81-75-383-3367
Received: 10 September 2018; Accepted: 10 October 2018; Published: 14 October 2018
	

Abstract: Changes in agricultural yields due to climate change will affect land use, agricultural
production volume, and food prices as well as macroeconomic indicators, such as GDP, which is
important as it enables one to compare climate change impacts across multiple sectors. This study
considered five key uncertainty factors and estimated macroeconomic impacts due to crop yield
changes using a novel integrated assessment framework. The five factors are (1) land-use change
(or yield aggregation method based on spatially explicit information), (2) the amplitude of the CO2
fertilization effect, (3) the use of different climate models, (4) socioeconomic assumptions and (5) the
level of mitigation stringency. We found that their global impacts on the macroeconomic indicator
value were 0.02–0.06% of GDP in 2100. However, the impacts on the agricultural sector varied greatly
by socioeconomic assumption. The relative contributions of these factors to the total uncertainty in the
projected macroeconomic indicator value were greater in a pessimistic world scenario characterized
by a large population size, low income, and low yield development than in an optimistic scenario
characterized by a small population size, high income, and high yield development (0.00%).
Keywords: agricultural impacts; climate change impacts; integrated assessment model; CGE model
1. Introduction
The economic impact of climate change on key economic sectors has been studied for a long time.
The latest findings in this research area were summarized by working group II in Chapter 10 of the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC AR 5) [1] and a recent
literature review [2]. With respect to the economic impact on the agricultural sector, the information
reported by IPCC AR5 is limited [3], and a review of studies using global economic models found in
Chapter 7 only provides the impacts on food prices and food security, but not those on the macroeconomy.
The same can be said of the Agricultural Model Inter-comparison Project (AgMIP) exercises [4,5].
There are some studies that deal with the macroeconomic implications of agricultural climate
change effects. For example, Reilly et al. [6] analyzed the economic impacts of reduction in agriculture
production using a partial equilibrium model, and estimated which regions of the world would be
winners or losers under climate change. Recently, on a global scale, Ren et al. [7] conducted a similar
analysis using a computable general equilibrium (CGE) model, and concluded that the macroeconomic
impact would be small in absolute terms (less than 1% of gross domestic product (GDP)). Roson and
Damania [8] made an assessment with multiple socioeconomic scenarios from the point of view of
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673; doi:10.3390/su10103673 332 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673
water scarcity. Another study used a partial equilibrium model and estimate changes in agricultural
welfare due to climate change [9]. The magnitude of welfare changes in trade liberalization scenarios
was reported to be 0 to −0.5%. Ciscar, et al. [10] investigated the economic effects of climate change
in Europe, and found that a macroeconomic loss of about 0.3% would occur in most global warming
scenarios when using a CGE model. As seen, the order of magnitude of the projected global agricultural
economic losses due to climate change is small (about 0–1% of GDP). Therefore, it is reasonable to use
food prices and population at risk of hunger as indicators rather than GDP change when assessing
climate change impacts on the agricultural sector.
However, a quantification of the GDP impacts in the agricultural sector is important as it enables
one to compare the climate change impacts across multiple sectors using a single macroeconomic
indicator. Ultimately, this can enable us to make comparisons in total cost between mitigation and
adaptation feasible, like in the literature [11]. However, the quantification of the economic impacts on
the agricultural sector involves many uncertain factors, including the use of different yield aggregation
methods and GCMs, and the use of different assumptions of the CO2 fertilization effect, global warming
level, and socioeconomic conditions.
We evaluated the relative contributions to the uncertainty in the projected GDP impacts in
agricultural sector and identified largest factors to change the GDP impact associated with agricultural
climate change impact. Here our scope is to understand the macroeconomic responses to the yield
changes; we thus apply a CGE model rather than a partial equilibrium model. The factors that we
have taken into account are the use of (1) different aggregation methods of gridded yield information,
(2) different assumptions of the CO2 fertilization effect, (3) GCMs, (4) level of mitigation policy and (5)
socioeconomic assumptions associated with Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs).
2. Methods
We use an integrated assessment model AIM (Asia-Pacific Integrated Model), which includes a
crop model (Crop Yield Growth Model with Assumptions on climate and socioeconomy: CYGMA),
a land use allocation model (AIM/PLUM: Asia-Pacific Integrated Model/integration Platform for
Land-Use and environmental Modelling) model in AIM/CGE model) [12], and a global computable
general equilibrium model (AIM/CGE) [13] were used as the main tools (see Supplementary
Materials, Figure S1). In addition, the Dynamic Integrated model of Climate and the Economy (DICE)
optimization model was used to derive the global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions constraints for
mitigation scenarios. AIM/CGE first performed a simulation (reference case) that had 17 aggregated
regions (see Table S1). As with losses in other sectors (e.g., health effects, and flood damage),
the impacts in the agricultural sector affect macroeconomic economies through changes in production
factor inputs such as labor, capital, and land. CGE models are suitable for the analysis of such
influences, and they have been used in many of the studies mentioned above compared to partial
equilibrium models.
Forms of land use, such as cropland (see Table S2), were then allocated using AIM/PLUM,
which handles land use on a grid basis. The yield potential map generated by CYGMA was then
aggregated into 17 AIM/CGE regions using either the current gridded harvest area or AIM/PLUM
(depending on scenario assumptions). Finally, the simulation covered the world from 2005 to 2100.
The potential yield of crops was based on estimates from CYGMA. However, CYGMA simulates only
rice, wheat, soybean, and maize yield. Therefore, for other crops (e.g., sugar crops), we used the
climate change impact on yield, generated by the Lund-Potsdam-Jena managed Land Dynamic Global
Vegetation and Water Balance Model (LPJmL) [14,15]. For the no climate change (NoCC) yield change
of other crops, we adopted the assumptions used in an earlier study [16] (Figure S2). For each model’s
performance, see more in Fujimori et al. (2017) [17], Hasegawa et al. (2017) [12] and Iizumi et al.
(2017) [18] for the CGE, land-use, and crop models, respectively.
Regarding the yield aggregation methods, we considered two methods. One was the time-fixed
cropland pattern and the other was time-varying cropland pattern simulated by a land-use allocation
333
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673
model (there is an attempt to do two time-fixed crop model comparison [19]). This is an important source
of uncertainty as aggregated yield changes differ depending on gridded cropland patterns [20] in which
similar approach has been implemented by earlier studies [21,22]. Biophysical crop models in general
have a high geographical resolution (e.g., a 0.5-degree grid size) and therefore the spatial aggregation of
crop model output is required when it is used as the input to CGE models with the spatial resolution of
10 to 20 regions at the global level. Although some agricultural economic models explicitly considered
changes in the geographic land-use pattern (e.g., MAgPIE [23] and GLOBIOM [24]), a CGE or regionally
aggregated equilibrium approach does not treat land-use changes in this way (agro-ecological zone
(AEZ), which is now used in many CGEs in the agricultural economic assessments partly allows such
geographic land-use pattern). For the CO2 fertilization effect, we compared the cases with and without
the CO2 fertilization effect on agricultural yields. For GCMs, we used a set of GCMs that was the same
with ISI-MIP (The Inter-Sectoral Impact Model Intercomparison Project). Recently developed SSPs and
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) framework allows us to comprehensively investigate
the effects of climate change and socioeconomic development patterns [25].
2.1. Model Brief Description
2.1.1. AIM/CGE
The AIM/CGE model includes 42 industrial classifications (see Table S3). The production sectors
are assumed to maximize profits under multi-nested constant elasticity substitution (CES) functions for
each input price. Household expenditures on each commodity are described by a linear expenditure
system (LES) function of which income elasticities for agricultural products are show in Table S7.
The parameters adopted in the linear expenditure system function are recursively updated by income
elasticity assumptions. The saving ratio is endogenously determined to balance saving and investment,
and capital formation for each good is determined by a fixed coefficient. The Armington assumption is
used for trade (CES and constant elasticity of transformation are assumed), and the current account is
assumed to be balanced.
The AIM/CGE model has a land-nesting strategy, similar to the approach taken in earlier studies [26].
Land is categorized into one of three ecological zones, and there is a land market for each zone.
The allocation of land by sector is formulated as a multi-nominal logit function to reflect differences
in substitutability across land categories with land rent. As such, the function assumes that land
owners in each region and AEZ decide on land sharing among options, with the land rent depending
on the production of each land unit (i.e., crops, livestock, and wood products). This is validated in
Fujimori et al. [17]. More details of this model can be found in the model documentation [13].
The agricultural yield impacts associated with climate change increase the cost of production.
The corresponding agricultural sectors attempt to expand harvesting area and demand in response
to the high price, which decreases the consumption. Compared with the conditions where labor,
capital and land resources are optimally allocated in terms of welfare maximization, the climate change
moves demand and supply of all goods, serves and primary factors to different points which causes
macroeconomic costs.
CGE model parameters are usually calibrated based on a single year’s social accounting matrix.
Our social accounting matrix is based on the reconciled various statistical data (e.g., GTAP [27],
National accounts [28], and so on.
2.1.2. Global Gridded Crop Model (CYGMA)
CYGAM is a biophysical global gridded crop yield model that can explicitly consider changes in
agronomic inputs to the production system, technology and management associated with economic
growth, and changes in the biophysical response of a crop to environmental conditions. The model
operates on a grid cell basis, with a grid interval of 0.5◦. CYGAM has an advantage to other crop models
in the way that it can explicitly deals with socioeconomic changes in yield evolutions. Crop growth
334
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673
is simulated on a daily basis and the influences on crop productivity (yield) regarding the crop’s
thermal requirement (this determines crop duration), sowing date and availability of heat, water,
and nitrogen, are considered. Growth stresses associated with nitrogen shortage, heat, cold, water
shortage, and water excess are also considered. The amount of annual nitrogen input is parameterized
as a function of per capita GDP and per capita agricultural area, country by country. All stress
types considered here are a function of the knowledge stock of agricultural technologies and climatic
conditions. The knowledge stock improves according to economic growth and increases the use of
improved varieties and associated agronomic management in farm fields, which allows simulated
crops to have an increased tolerance to stresses. For the base year calibration, the crop-specific
coefficients that represent tolerance to abiotic stresses and yield response to nitrogen deficit were
calibrated based on the high-resolution (5-min arc or 10-km) average actual and potential yield data in
2000 (Monfreda et al. 2008 [29], Mueller et al. 2012 [30]). The similar method that uses a time-constant,
spatial yield dataset for the model calibration can be seen in Deryng et al. (2011) [31]. The coefficients
are crop-specific, but universal across locations. The verification of the model and its application to the
future climate and socioeconomic conditions are described in Iizumi et al. [18].
2.1.3. AIM/PLUM
The AIM/PLUM is a global land-use allocation model used to downscale the AIM/CGE’s
aggregated regional land-use projections into a spatial gridded land-use pattern for the interactive
assessment of human activities and biophysical elements. Regional-scale land demand estimated by
AIM/CGE (17 regions) was fed into the AIM/PLUM land-use allocation model and was spatially
distributed into grid cells (0.5◦ × 0.5◦). The cropland and afforestation area was allocated based on
optimization (profit maximization), where a landowner was assumed to decide the mix of land-uses
to obtain the highest profit for a given biophysical land productivity condition (e.g., crop yield
production per unit area). Because the optimization was solved for each region that had the same
regional classification as that used in AIM/CGE, land transactions across the regions were not allowed.
There were seven crop types, with or without irrigation. Land for harvested wood was excluded
from the model framework. The bioenergy crop yield and forest carbon sequestration were based on
estimates from the Vegetation Integrative Simulator for Trace Gases (VISIT) [32]. Please see Hasegawa,
Fujimori, Ito, Takahashi and Masui [12] for more details of the model description and validation.
2.2. Scenarios
We computed scenarios considering the five factors “crop yield aggregation method,” “CO2
fertilization,” “socioeconomic assumptions,” “mitigation policy,” and “multi-GCMs.” All scenarios
that were quantified are shown in Table 1. There were two ways to aggregate the crop model CYGMA
gridded information into the aggregated area of AIM/CGE. The first method was to calculate the
average yield of 17 regions by fixing the gridded land use or harvest area to the current situation
(“base” in Table 1). The other method was a case in which there was a land-use change option to change
gridded cultivated land according to yield using AIM/PLUM (“Change” in Table 1). The second
factor was that of consideration, or not, of the CO2 fertilization effect, which is considered in CYGMA
with the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) CO2 concentration information. The third
factor was a socioeconomic assumption using the SSPs (SSP1, SSP2, and SSP3). Social and economic
conditions such as GDP, population, and food preference also followed the SSPs [16,25].
For each case, we conducted a run with and without climate change cases. The cases without
climate change used current climate conditions. For the climate change cases, RCP 8.5 and RCP2.6 [33]
were used. Although SSP1, SSP2, and SSP3 do not reach such a high level of forcing [25], considering the
comparability of scenarios and relevancy of the climate impacts, the RCP8.5 climate condition was the
most appropriate for this study. Moreover, the uncertainties of using multiple GCMs were incorporated
into the five GCMs, which were also used in ISIMIP (Table S4). The mitigation policy approximately
corresponded to a 450 ppm CO2 concentration stabilization. We capped the global total GHG emissions
335
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673
constraint for AIM/CGE derived from a modified DICE model [34] of which emissions pathway might
be slightly different from original RCP pathways but they would be close enough for this paper’s
analysis. Here we did not consider near-term (2025 to 2030) policies such as Paris Agreement, but for
the agricultural macroeconomic impact this position would not change the major findings because the
climate change impact becomes severe after 2030. For the agricultural markets, GDP and population
are well known representative socioeconomic indicators but also dietary preferences and the degree of
openness of trade are considered. They are described in Popp et al. (2017) [35]. More details of how
we implemented the mitigation scenario are provided in Fujimori, et al. [16].
We ran selected combinations of each of the factors rather than all possible combinations to
appropriately address the main research questions, as shown in Table 1. The main aims of this study
were to clarify the macroeconomic impact due to climate change. Therefore, the basic strategy was
to compare NoCC and climate change cases (e.g., RCP8.5). To determine the impact of differences in
the yield aggregation method, we considered the differences between selected scenarios; for example
(scenario 3–scenario 2) and (scenario 5–scenario 4) (scenario numbers are shown in Table 1). Another
example is to assess the impact of CO2 fertilization we considered the differences between (scenario
3–scenario 4) and (scenario 6–scenario 5). Here, two things had to be addressed. First, using the
current harvest area was adopted as a pivot for the yield aggregation method. Second, scenario
10 was a hypothetical scenario in which the climate was stabilized at a low CO2 concentration, without
mitigation efforts. However, we computed this scenario to derive the pure climate change effect in the
RCP2.6 climate condition (scenario 10–scenario 11).
Table 1. List of scenarios.
Scenario
Number
Socioeconomic
Condition
Climate
Condition
Yield Aggregation
Method *
CO2 Fertilization
Effect Mitigation
1 SSP2 NoCC Base
2 SSP2 NoCC Change
3 SSP2 RCP8.5 Change
4 SSP2 RCP8.5 Change X
5 SSP2 RCP8.5 Base X
6 SSP1 NoCC Base
7 SSP1 RCP8.5 Base
8 SSP3 NoCC Base
9 SSP3 RCP8.5 Base
10 SSP2 RCP2.6 Base
11 SSP2 RCP2.6 Base X
* If the yield aggregation is based on the current harvest gridded map, it shows Base. If the gridded land use change
is taken, it is “Change.”
3. Results
3.1. Macroeconomic Losses
The global total macroeconomic impact (rate of GDP change) in 2100 due to changes in agricultural
yield, relative to the corresponding NoCC cases (e.g., scenario 3–scenario 1), is shown in Figure 1.
In total, the range of the GDP change was from 0.00% to −0.57%. For the scenario 1 case, which is
without gridded land-use change, has no CO2 fertilization, and used SSP2 and RCP8.5, in 2100 the
median change is 0.04%. The yield aggregation method produces about half (0.02%) of the change of
the no gridded land use case (panel a). However, considering the uncertainty of GCMs, this difference
is ambiguous. When focusing on the existence of the CO2 fertilization effect (panel b), the median
change is about 0.02%, which is similar to the yield aggregation method effect. The climate change
condition is a stronger factor than either the yield aggregation method effect or the CO2 fertilization
effect in terms of the macroeconomy. The use of RCP2.6 results in a worldwide rate of GDP loss of
−0.01%, which represents an overall positive effect, with all GCMs producing a positive change (panel
336
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673
c). This positive effect would be caused by modest warming. Note that these scenarios do not consider
mitigation costs. If mitigation is considered, the mitigation costs would dominate the GDP changes,
resulting in clear losses and the climate change impact on yield being much smaller than the mitigation
cost (see Figure S3). On the other hand, it can be seen from (panel d) in Figure 1 that the difference
depending on the socioeconomic conditions is remarkable in SSP3, with the digits differing by one order
of magnitude. The use of SSP3 produces a difference of 0.57%, while the use of SSP1 has little influence.
Figure 2 shows time series information about each climate change level, with regional information.
From a worldwide perspective, the rate of GDP loss (negative GDP change) increases rapidly after 2050.
The range of uncertainty also increases over time. The uncertainty range in RCP8.5 is larger than that in
RCP2.6, which is basically driven by crop model outcome (shown later in Figure 4).The increase is not
a unique characteristic across the five large regions. For example, the OECD median value is almost
stable, while the range of uncertainty increases in the latter half of the century. The median in Asia is
also stable and the range of uncertainty is almost constant over time across the scenarios. In contrast,
Africa (MAF) and Latin America (LAM) are relatively low-latitude zones that could be sensitive to
the effects of global warming. In these countries, RCP8.5 resulted in a higher GDP loss than RCP2.6.
Reforming regions (REF; mostly the former Soviet Union) are also likely to have a negative impact in
RCP8.5, but the range of uncertainty is large. More detailed regional results indicate that there are some
regions or countries that the order of the magnitude is higher than those shown in Figure 2 (e.g., Rest of
Asia; XSA in Figure S4). Note that regional heterogeneity is also apparent across the yield aggregation
method options and CO2 fertilization assumption differences (Figures S5 and S6).
Figure 1. Global total macroeconomic impact due to changes in agricultural yield in the year
2100 considering: (a) yield aggregation method differences (“Base” considers a fixed grid-level harvest
map and “Change” considers land-use change at grid level, with both under SSP2), (b) CO2 fertilization
(on or off), (c) climate condition, and (d) socioeconomic condition. Boxplots represent the uncertainty
of five general circulation models (GCMs). For panels (a,b,c) left, and the center of (d) boxplots are
identical because they are the same scenario (RCP8.5), with no CO2 fertilization and no land-use
change cases.
Interestingly, the added agricultural value has much more visible changes than GDP, and the sign is
positive, which means an increase in agricultural added value (Figure 3). The food consumption response
is much lower than yield change (Figures S7 and S8) due to the price elasticity far less than 1 (Table S6),
the basic reactions of the CGE model to the yield changes are expanding the cultivated area (Figure S7).
Therefore, the yield negative effect will require additional labor and capital, which will increase the
production price and added value of the agriculture sector. On the other hand, these additional labor and
capital in agriculture sectors would decrease the resource availability in other industries that would have
relatively higher productivity than agriculture sectors, which eventually generates GDP loss as shown
above in spite of an increase in added agricultural value. The order of the magnitude is around 10-30% of
changes compared to no climate change cases, which are remarkably large.
337
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673
Figure 2. Macroeconomic impact due to changes in agricultural yield in SSP2 in five regions and as a
global total (positive means increase compared with baseline). The colors represent climate change
level (RCPs). The shaded area is the general circulation model (GCM) range of uncertainty (five
GCMs for RCP8.5, and RCP2.6). The lines are the median of five GCMs for each RCP2.6 and RCP8.5.
The scenarios in which CO2 fertilization and land-use change are both included are shown. Regional
codes are OECD9, OECD regions; Asia, Asia; REF, Reforming region; MAF, Middle East and Africa;
and LAM, Latin America. (The mapping procedure from 17 regions is shown in Table S1.)
Figure 3. Global agricultural value added impact due to changes in agricultural yield in the year
2100 considering (positive means increase compared with baseline): (a) yield aggregation method
differences (“Base” considers a fixed grid-level harvest map and “Change” considers land-use
change at grid level, with both under SSP2), (b) CO2 fertilization (on or off), (c) climate condition,
and (d) socioeconomic condition. Boxplots represent the uncertainty of five general circulation models
(GCMs). For panels (a,b,c) left, and the center of (d) boxplots are identical because they are the same
scenario (RCP8.5), with no CO2 fertilization and no land-use change cases.
338
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673
3.2. Changes in Agricultural Yield Associated with Climate Change and Its Consequences
Figure 4 (panel a) shows the average yield of five crops (rice, wheat, other cereals, oil
crops, and sugar crops) for AIM/CGE in 17 regions and the global total (see individual crops in
Figures S9–S12). The yields are clearly different among the cases with different climate change
conditions, i.e., RCP2.6, RCP8.5, and NoCC. The mean global mean yield is currently around 3 t/ha.
Because of technological progress, which is mainly caused by the growth of income, the yield
increases to about 5 t/ha in the scenario where climate conditions are kept at the current level (NoCC).
The RCP2.6 case is similar to the NoCC case. This trend is apparent in the global total, but varies
regionally in some cases. For example, the yield in India is about 25% lower for the RCP2.6 case
than NoCC, while in China it is slightly larger than NoCC (less than 10%). Although the impact on
global average yield is negative in RCP2.6 there is a positive impact on GDP. This is mainly due to the
weighting used to calculate the average value. Regional GDP, the impact on yield, and agricultural
production has different weighting, and the way that the average is calculated causes discrepancies.
In the RCP8.5 case, there is a substantial decrease in yield. The difference in the global mean
decrease from the NoCC decrease is not dissimilar in the first couple of decades of the 21st century,
before the influence of climate change becomes apparent but, over time, the deviation becomes large.
In 2100, it is almost 3 t/ha, which is almost the same as in 2005. Although there are always uncertainties
associated with the use of multiple GCMs, the negative effect on yield is clearly seen. In particular,
the remarkable tendency for a deviation from the yield decrease in the NoCC case mentioned above
is significant in developing countries such as India (IND), other Asia (XSA), and other Africa (XAF).
Even when CO2 fertilization is considered, a similar pattern is apparent, although the negative effect is
modest (see Figure S5).
(a)
Figure 4. Cont.
339
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673
(b)
Figure 4. (a) Mean changes in a) yield and (b) price of five major crops for 17 regions (Table S1) and
the global average in two climate change cases (green; RCP2.6 and red; RCP8.5) and the no climate
change (NoCC) case (blue dot). The ribbon indicates the range of uncertainty for five general circulation
models (GCMs). The units are t/Ha and 1000$/t, respectively.
As can be seen from Figure 4 (panel b), the yield decreases lead to a food price increase, which is also
discussed in IPCC AR5 and AgMIP literature [3–5]. In 2100, the global average price of five major crops
in the RCP8.5 case is much higher than in the NoCC and RCP2.6 cases. The RCP2.6 and NoCC cases
are similar, and RCP8.5 is around 70% (range of 30 to 120%) higher than NoCC. This price response is
higher than that reported in the AgMIP study (0 to 60%). Since the yield information, and the models are
different from AgMIP, it is not fully comparable, but one of the reasons could be that AgMIP’s focus is the
year 2050, in which the impact of climate change is not projected to be as severe as in 2100.
3.3. Gridded Yield Aggregation Method Effect
We addressed the changes in GDP associated with aggregation method of gridded yield
information in Section 3.1. The next question with respect to this land-use change treatment is how
much significant changes are generated in the yield between these two methods. The Figure 5 illustrates
yield differences and some regions are quite overlapping, which means land-use change treatment do
not change in the macroscale results. However, interestingly, many regions show quite different yield
trajectories across the land use treatment. In particular, North Africa (XNF) and the Middle East (XME)
are remarkably different regions. Crops specific results are more diverse. These results imply that an
analysis that requires regional and crop-specific focuses should deal with the spatial explicit land-use
change appropriately.
340
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673
Figure 5. Mean yield of five major crops for 17 regions (Table S1) and the global average in two yield
aggregation method for land-use change treatment cases (red; fixed as base year harvested area and
red; changed dynamically) under RCP8.5 and non-CO2 fertilization cases. The ribbon indicates the
range of uncertainty for five general circulation models (GCMs). The units are t/Ha.
4. Discussion
The socioeconomic differences cause a relatively large impact on the global macroeconomy in
terms of agricultural yield differences. There are two implications from this. First, in the situation
where climate mitigation failed, it would be desirable for societal development to be directed toward
SSP1 like world in the SSPs context so that the impact of climate change can be kept to a minimum
locally and globally. Second, the fact that socioeconomic conditions are a major factor means that
further detailed research is required in this area.
One of the focuses of this study is how much the spatially explicit land-use change responded
to changes in crop yield due to the influence of climate change on the macroeconomy. Conventional
CGE studies have not treated these issues appropriately. From the results of this study, this is found
to be a significant factor. It should be noted that the GCM uncertainty could hide the significance of
the results of GDP. However, considering the regional variation, the methodology aggregating yield
information by using future spatial land-use change is important at the regional or crop specific level.
This would imply that methodological improvement may need to be considered for the CGE modeling
which might also be better to reconsider the model intercomparison exercise [36].
The macroeconomic impact of changes in agricultural yield associated with future climate change
is found to be small compared with the economic analysis of climate effects in other sectors where
the large sectors would be 0 point several percentages or even higher [37,38]. For example, in IPCC
AR5, [1] reported that a 3.0 ◦C increase in global mean temperature would lead to around 1 to
3% welfare loss. The most severe climate change case in our study is RCP8.5, which has an increase in
global mean temperature of more than 4 ◦C. The macroeconomic loss in agriculture due to climate
change is one order of magnitude less than that of the total impact across all sectors. The magnitude of
this loss is similar to that reported in earlier studies [7,9,10]. There are several possible reasons for this.
First, the value added by the agricultural sector is small relative to the GDP of the economy as a whole.
341
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673
The current share of agricultural value added is 3.7% of total GDP (Table S5). The GDP in 2100 is
projected to increase by about seven times compared to the current value in SSP2, but because most of
the growth would originate from secondary and tertiary sectors, the ratio of value added in agriculture
in 2100 to GDP is 1.3%. Second, depending on the region, there are some areas where the influence
on the macroeconomy is projected to be positive (indicated by negative GDP losses in the figure),
which are offset in the global values. However, this offset effect is not significant. Third, the adjustment
effect due to international trade could be a factor. However, the value added by the agricultural sector
is considered to be the primary reason. Although here we focused on macroeconomic implications
in order to obtain climate change impact information that is comparable across sectors, we should
note that it does not mean agricultural climate change is less important despite small macroeconomic
changes. Rather, they are related to human basic needs and may entail a human health effect [39,40].
With regard to the regional variation, no specific trend could be identified from the regional
information, and it is not clear in which region climate change would have a negative influence. It is
clear that low latitude regions experienced relatively high impacts, which could be due to a pure
climate change effect, but could also be due to the low GDP per capita. In these regions, the value
added of agriculture to GDP is higher than developed countries and the economic impact of climate
change seems to be higher as well, which suggests that the impacts on GDP could be larger in
developing countries.
5. Limitations
There were several limitations of this research. First, we only used one crop model and one
economic model, and the results might have been different if multiple models had been used.
We believe that additional model inter-comparison experiments are, therefore, necessary. Second, there
are some constraints in the use of CYGMA information. (1) The wheat sector yield is biased because
CYGMA wheat currently only deals with spring wheat. This aspect of the model should be improved
in the future. (2) The yields of crops other than those treated by CYGMA were obtained from LPJml
and the two models are not fully consistent. Because the trends in the four major crops were dealt
with appropriately, the major outcomes would be unaffected by this treatment. This crop-cover issue
should also be resolved in future studies. (3) We experimented limited scenario combinations and
there could be much more possibilities such as SSP4 and SSP5, or different climate levels (e.g., RCP45).
(4) The study attempts to account for all relevant uncertainties as much as possible considering current
model capability, but there are still some missing elements (e.g., the geopolitical international situation
and the possibility of transgenic species). As in studies of the impact of climate change in other
sectors, particularly for economic analyses, it is difficult to cover all aspects of the subject, although the
modeling framework attempts to capture the main factors.
6. Conclusions
This study reveals the macroeconomic impact of climate change in the agriculture sector using an
integrated assessment modelling framework. By considering various factors, such as mitigation policy,
the yield aggregation method associated with gridded land-use change, GCM uncertainty, and CO2
fertilization, the macroeconomic impact is found to be small (0.02–0.06%), even in the case with the
highest level of warming. However, when the socioeconomic condition is changed to SSP3 from SSP2,
the scale of the impact increases by an order of magnitude. This study highlights the importance of
consideration of future socioeconomic conditions in the agricultural economic implications associated
with climate change impacts.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at http://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/10/10/3673/
s1, Figure S1: Asia-Pacific Integrated Model (AIM) modeling framework, Figure S2: Ten-year mean annual
yield growth rate for the SSP1, SSP2, and SSP3 baseline scenarios, Figure S3: The macroeconomic impact due to
mitigation policy (RCP2.6 equivalent) and agricultural yield change for RCP2.6 for five regions and the global
total, Figure S4: Macroeconomic impact due to changes in agricultural yield in SSP2 in five regions and as a global
total, Figure S5: The macroeconomic impact due to changes in agricultural yield for RCP8.5 with and without
342
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673
CO2 fertilization for five regions and the global total, Figure S6: The macroeconomic impact due to changes in
the agricultural yield for RCP8.5 with and without consideration of land-use change for five regions and the
global total, Figure S7: Global main indicators’ changes for RCP2.6 (right) and RCP8.5 (left) in 2050 (top) and
2010 (bottom), Figure S8: Food consumption as colorific in take per capita, per day change for the 17 regions
of the Asia-Pacific Integrated Model/Computable General Equilibrium (AIM/CGE) and the global average in
two climate change cases (green; RCP2.6 and red; RCP8.5) and the no climate change (NoCC) case (blue dot),
Figure S9: Yield change of coarse grains for the 17 regions of the Asia-Pacific Integrated Model/Computable
General Equilibrium (AIM/CGE) and the global average in two climate change cases (green; RCP2.6 and red;
RCP8.5) and the no climate change (NoCC) case (blue dot), Figure S10: Yield change of oil seeds for the 17 regions
of the Asia-Pacific Integrated Model/Computable General Equilibrium (AIM/CGE) and the global average in two
climate change cases (green; RCP2.6 and red; RCP8.5) and the no climate change (NoCC) case (blue dot), Figure S11:
Yield change of rice for the 17 regions of the Asia-Pacific Integrated Model/Computable General Equilibrium
(AIM/CGE) and the global average in two climate change cases (green; RCP2.6 and red; RCP8.5) and the no climate
change (NoCC) case (blue dot), Figure S12: Yield change of wheat for the 17 regions of the Asia-Pacific Integrated
Model/Computable General Equilibrium (AIM/CGE) and the global average in two climate change cases (green;
RCP2.6 and red; RCP8.5) and the no climate change (NoCC) case (blue dot), Figure S13: Yield change of five
major crops for the 17 regions of the Asia-Pacific Integrated Model/Computable General Equilibrium (AIM/CGE)
and the global average in a climate change (RCP8.5) case and the no climate change (NoCC) cases (blue dot),
Figure S14: Rice yield for 17 regions in the Asia-Pacific Integrated Model/Computable General Equilibrium
(AIM/CGE) and the global average in two gridded yield aggregation method associated with land-use change (red;
fixed as base year harvested area and red; changed dynamically) under RCP8.5 and non-CO2 fertilization cases,
Figure S15: Wheat yield for 17 regions in the Asia-Pacific Integrated Model/Computable General Equilibrium
(AIM/CGE) and the global average in two gridded yield aggregation method associated with land-use change
(red; fixed as base year harvested area and red; changed dynamically) under RCP8.5 and non-CO2 fertilization
cases, Figure S16: Coarse grain yield for 17 regions in the Asia-Pacific Integrated Model/Computable General
Equilibrium (AIM/CGE) and the global average in two gridded yield aggregation method associated with
land-use change (red; fixed as base year harvested area and red; changed dynamically) under RCP8.5 and
non-CO2 fertilization cases, Table S1. Regional classifications., Table S2: Land use classification, Table S3:
Industrial classification, Table S4: List of general circulation models (GCMs), Table S5: Share of primary sector’s
value added in total GDP for SSP1, SSP2, and SSP3, Table S6: Price elasticity in 2050 baseline case. The numbers
are derived from LES (Linear Expenditure System) consumption function, and Table S7: Income elasticity in
2050 baseline case. The numbers are derived from LES (Linear Expenditure System) consumption function.
Author Contributions: S.F., T.I. and T.H. designed the research; S.F., T.I. and T.K. carried out the simulations; S.F.
carried out the analysis of the modeling results; S.F. led the writing of the paper; S.F. created figures; all authors
contributed to the discussion and interpretation of the results.
Funding: This research is supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP16K18177, JSPS Overseas Research
Fellowships, and Environment Research and Technology Development Fund S-14-5 of the Environmental
Restoration and Conservation Agency.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Arent, D.; Tol, R.; Faust, E.; Hella, J.; Kumar, S.; Strzepek, K.M. Key economic sectors and services. In Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects; Contribution ofWorking
Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; Field, C.B.,
Barros, V.R., Dokken, D.J., Mach, K.J., Mastrandrea, M.D., Bilir, T.E., Chatterjee, M., Ebi, K.L., Estrada, Y.O.,
Genova, R.C., et al., Eds.; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2014.
2. Tol, R.S.J. The Economic Impacts of Climate Change. Rev. Environ. Econ. Policy 2018, 12, 4–25. [CrossRef]
3. Porter, J.R.; Xie, L.; Challinor, A.J.; Cochrane, K.; Howden, S.M.; Iqbal, M.M.; Lobell, D.B.; Travasso, M.I.
Chapter 7: Food Security and Food Production Systems; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2014.
4. Nelson, G.C.; van der Mensbrugghe, D.; Ahammad, H.; Blanc, E.; Calvin, K.; Hasegawa, T.; Havlik, P.;
Heyhoe, E.; Kyle, P.; Lotze-Campen, H.; et al. Agriculture and climate change in global scenarios: Why don’t
the models agree. Agric. Econ. 2014, 45, 85–101. [CrossRef]
5. von Lampe, M.; Willenbockel, D.; Ahammad, H.; Blanc, E.; Cai, Y.; Calvin, K.; Fujimori, S.; Hasegawa, T.;
Havlik, P.; Heyhoe, E.; et al. Why do global long-term scenarios for agriculture differ? An overview of the
AgMIP Global Economic Model Intercomparison. Agric. Econ. 2014, 45, 3–20. [CrossRef]
6. Reilly, J.; Hohmann, N.; Kane, S. Climate change and agricultural trade. Glob. Environ. Chang. 1994, 4, 24–36.
[CrossRef]
343
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673
7. Ren, X.; Weitzel, M.; O’Neill, B.C.; Lawrence, P.; Meiyappan, P.; Levis, S.; Balistreri, E.J.; Dalton, M. Avoided
economic impacts of climate change on agriculture: Integrating a land surface model (CLM) with a global
economic model (iPETS). Clim. Chang. 2016, 146, 517–531. [CrossRef]
8. Roson, R.; Damania, R. The macroeconomic impact of future water scarcity: An assessment of alternative
scenarios. J. Policy Model. 2017, 39, 1141–1162. [CrossRef]
9. Stevanovi´c, M.; Popp, A.; Lotze-Campen, H.; Dietrich, J.P.; Müller, C.; Bonsch, M.; Schmitz, C.; Bodirsky, B.L.;
Humpenöder, F.;Weindl, I. The impact of high-end climate change on agricultural welfare. Science Adv. 2016,
2, e1501452. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Ciscar, J.C.; Iglesias, A.; Feyen, L.; Szabo, L.; Van Regemorter, D.; Amelung, B.; Nicholls, R.; Watkiss, P.;
Christensen, O.B.; Dankers, R.; et al. Physical and economic consequences of climate change in Europe.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2011, 108, 2678–2683. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. van der Mensbrugghe, D. Chapter 14—Modeling the Global Economy–Forward-Looking Scenarios for
Agriculture. In Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling; Dixon, P.B., Jorgenson, D.W., Eds.;
Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2013; Volume 1, pp. 933–994.
12. Hasegawa, T.; Fujimori, S.; Ito, A.; Takahashi, K.; Masui, T. Global land-use allocation model linked to an
integrated assessment model. Sci. Total Environ. 2017, 580, 787–796. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Fujimori, S.; Masui, T.; Matsuoka, Y. AIM/CGE [Basic] Manual; Version 2012-01; Center for Social and
Environmental Systems Research, National Institute Environmental Studies: Tsukuba, Japan, 2012; pp. 1–87.
14. Bondeau, A.; Smith, P.C.; Zaehle, S.; Schaphoff, S.; Lucht, W.; Cramer, W.; Gerten, D.; Lotze-Campen, H.;
MÜLler, C.; Reichstein, M.; et al. Modelling the role of agriculture for the 20th century global terrestrial
carbon balance. Glob. Chang. Biol. 2007, 13, 679–706. [CrossRef]
15. Rosenzweig, C.; Elliott, J.; Deryng, D.; Ruane, A.C.; Müller, C.; Arneth, A.; Boote, K.J.; Folberth, C.; Glotter, M.;
Khabarov, N.; et al. Assessing agricultural risks of climate change in the 21st century in a global gridded
crop model intercomparison. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2014, 111, 3268–3273. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Fujimori, S.; Hasegawa, T.; Masui, T.; Takahashi, K.; Herran, D.S.; Dai, H.; Hijioka, Y.; Kainuma, M. SSP3:
AIM implementation of Shared Socioeconomic Pathways. Glob. Environ. Chang. 2017, 42, 268–283. [CrossRef]
17. Fujimori, S.; Dai, H.; Masui, T.; Matsuoka, Y. Global energy model hindcasting. Energy 2016, 114, 293–301.
[CrossRef]
18. Iizumi, T.; Furuya, J.; Shen, Z.; Kim, W.; Okada, M.; Fujimori, S.; Hasegawa, T.; Nishimori, M. Responses
of crop yield growth to global temperature and socioeconomic changes. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 7800. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
19. Babel, M.S.; Deb, P.; Soni, P. Performance Evaluation of AquaCrop and DSSAT-CERES for Maize Under
Different Irrigation and Manure Application Rates in the Himalayan Region of India. Agric. Res. 2018, 1–11.
[CrossRef]
20. Porwollik, V.; Müller, C.; Elliott, J.; Chryssanthacopoulos, J.; Iizumi, T.; Ray, D.K.; Ruane, A.C.; Arneth, A.;
Balkoviˇc, J.; Ciais, P.; et al. Spatial and temporal uncertainty of crop yield aggregations. Eur. J. Agron. 2017,
88, 10–21. [CrossRef]
21. Ruth, D.; Gernot, K.; Florian, Z.; Wolfram, M. Global economic–biophysical assessment of midterm scenarios
for agricultural markets—biofuel policies, dietary patterns, cropland expansion, and productivity growth.
Environ. Res. Lett. 2018, 13, 025003. [CrossRef]
22. Mauser, W.; Klepper, G.; Zabel, F.; Delzeit, R.; Hank, T.; Putzenlechner, B.; Calzadilla, A. Global biomass
production potentials exceed expected future demand without the need for cropland expansion. Nat. Commun.
2015, 6, 8946. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Humpenöder, F.; Popp, A.; Stevanovic, M.; Müller, C.; Bodirsky, B.L.; Bonsch, M.; Dietrich, J.P.;
Lotze-Campen, H.; Weindl, I.; Biewald, A.; et al. Land-Use and Carbon Cycle Responses to Moderate
Climate Change: Implications for Land-Based Mitigation? Environ. Sci. Technol. 2015, 49, 6731–6739.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Havlík, P.; Schneider, U.A.; Schmid, E.; Böttcher, H.; Fritz, S.; Skalský, R.; Aoki, K.; Cara, S.D.; Kindermann, G.;
Kraxner, F.; et al. Global land-use implications of first and second generation biofuel targets. Energy Policy
2011, 39, 5690–5702. [CrossRef]
25. Riahi, K.; van Vuuren, D.P.; Kriegler, E.; Edmonds, J.; O’Neill, B.C.; Fujimori, S.; Bauer, N.; Calvin, K.;
Dellink, R.; Fricko, O.; et al. The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and their energy, land use, and greenhouse
gas emissions implications: An overview. Glob. Environ. Chang. 2017, 42, 153–168. [CrossRef]
344
Sustainability 2018, 10, 3673
26. Wise, M.; Calvin, K. GCAM3.0 Agriculture and Land Use: Technical Description of Modeling Approach;
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory: Richland, WA, USA, 2011.
27. Dimaranan, B.V. Global Trade, Assistance, and Production: The GTAP 6 Data Base; Dimaranan, B.V., Ed.;
Center for Global Trade Analysis, Purdue University: West Lafayette, IN, USA, 2006.
28. United Nations, (UN). National Accounts Main Aggregates Database; United Nations: New York, NY, USA, 2013.
29. Monfreda, C.; Ramankutty, N.; Foley, J.A. Farming the planet: 2. Geographic distribution of crop areas,
yields, physiological types, and net primary production in the year 2000. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles 2008, 22.
[CrossRef]
30. Mueller, N.D.; Gerber, J.S.; Johnston, M.; Ray, D.K.; Ramankutty, N.; Foley, J.A. Closing yield gaps through
nutrient and water management. Nature 2012, 490, 254–257. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. Deryng, D.; Sacks, W.J.; Barford, C.C.; Ramankutty, N. Simulating the effects of climate and agricultural
management practices on global crop yield. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles 2011, 25. [CrossRef]
32. Ito, A.; Inatomi, M. Water-Use Efficiency of the Terrestrial Biosphere: A Model Analysis Focusing on
Interactions between the Global Carbon andWater Cycles. J. Hydrometeorol. 2012, 13, 681–694. [CrossRef]
33. van Vuuren, D.P.; Edmonds, J.; Kainuma, M.; Riahi, K.; Thomson, A.; Hibbard, K.; Hurtt, G.C.; Kram, T.;
Krey, V.; Lamarque, J.-F.; et al. The representative concentration pathways: An overview. Clim. Chang. 2011,
109, 5–31. [CrossRef]
34. Fujimori, S.; Su, X.; Liu, J.-Y.; Hasegawa, T.; Takahashi, K.; Masui, T.; Takimi, M. Implication of Paris
Agreement in the context of long-term climate mitigation goals. SpringerPlus 2016, 5, 1–11.
35. Popp, A.; Calvin, K.; Fujimori, S.; Havlik, P.; Humpenoeder, F.; Stehfest, E.; Bodirsky, B.L.; Dietrich, J.P.;
Doelmann, J.C.; Gusti, M.; et al. Land-use futures in the shared socio-economic pathways. Glob. Environ.
Chang. Hum. Policy Dimens. 2017, 42, 331–345. [CrossRef]
36. Hasegawa, T.; Fujimori, S.; Havlík, P.; Valin, H.; Bodirsky, B.L.; Doelman, J.C.; Fellmann, T.; Kyle, P.;
Koopman, J.F.L.; Lotze-Campen, H.; et al. Risk of increased food insecurity under stringent global climate
change mitigation policy. Nat. Clim. Chang. 2018, 8, 699–703. [CrossRef]
37. Park, C.; Fujimori, S.; Hasegawa, T.; Takakura, J.Y.; Takahashi, K.; Hijioka, Y. Avoided economic impacts of
energy demand changes by 1.5 and 2 ◦C climate stabilization. Environ. Res. Lett. 2018, 13, 045010. [CrossRef]
38. Takakura, J.Y.; Fujimori, S.; Takahashi, K.; Hijioka, Y.; Hasegawa, T.; Honda, Y.; Masui, T. Cost of
preventing workplace heat-related illness through worker breaks and the benefit of climate-change mitigation.
Environ. Res. Lett. 2017, 12, 064010. [CrossRef]
39. Hasegawa, T.; Fujimori, S.; Takahashi, K.; Yokohata, T.; Masui, T. Economic implications of climate change
impacts on human health through undernourishment. Clim. Chang. 2016, 136, 1–14. [CrossRef]
40. Springmann, M.; Godfray, H.C.J.; Rayner, M.; Scarborough, P. Analysis and valuation of the health and
climate change cobenefits of dietary change. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016, 113, 4146–4151. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
345

MDPI
St. Alban-Anlage 66
4052 Basel
Switzerland
Tel. +41 61 683 77 34
Fax +41 61 302 89 18
www.mdpi.com
Sustainability Editorial Office
E-mail: sustainability@mdpi.com
www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

MDPI
St. Alban-Anlage 66
4052 Basel
Switzerland
Tel: +41 61 683 77 34
Fax: +41 61 302 89 18
www.mdpi.com ISBN 978-3-03897-815-2