Sustainable
Business Models
Adam Jabłoński
www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Edited by
Printed Edition of the Special Issue Published in Sustainability
Sustainable Business Models

Sustainable Business Models
Special Issue Editor
Adam Jabło ´ nski
MDPI • Basel • Beijing • Wuhan • Barcelona • Belgrade
Special Issue Editor
Adam Jabło ´ nski
Institute of Management
WSB University Pozna´n
Poland
Editorial Office
MDPI
St. Alban-Anlage 66
4052 Basel, Switzerland
This is a reprint of articles from the Special Issue published online in the open access journal
Sustainability (ISSN 2071-1050) from 2015 to 2016 (available at: https://www.mdpi.com/journal/
sustainability/special issues/sustainable business models)
For citation purposes, cite each article independently as indicated on the article page online and as
indicated below:
LastName, A.A.; LastName, B.B.; LastName, C.C. Article Title. Journal Name Year, Article Number,
Page Range.
ISBN 978-3-03897-560-1 (Pbk)
ISBN 978-3-03897-561-8 (PDF)
c 2019 by the authors. Articles in this book are Open Access and distributed under the Creative
Commons Attribution (CC BY) license, which allows users to download, copy and build upon
published articles, as long as the author and publisher are properly credited, which ensures maximum
dissemination and a wider impact of our publications.
The book as a whole is distributed by MDPI under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons
license CC BY-NC-ND.
Contents
About the Special Issue Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
Preface to ”Sustainable Business Models” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi
Chih-Chao Chung, Li-Chung Chao, Chih-Hong Chen and Shi-Jer Lou
A Balanced Scorecard of Sustainable Management in the Taiwanese Bicycle Industry:
Development of Performance Indicators and Importance Analysis
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 518, doi:10.3390/su8060518 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Tuananh Tran and Joon Young Park
Development of a Novel Co-Creative Framework for Redesigning Product Service System
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 434, doi:10.3390/su8050434 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Adam Jabło ´ nski and Marek Jabło ´ nski
Research on Business Models in their Life Cycle
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 430, doi:10.3390/su8050430 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Nestor Shpak, Tamara Kyrylych and Jolita Greblikait˙e
Diversification Models of Sales Activity for Steady Development of an Enterprise
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 393, doi:10.3390/su8040393 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Andrea Sujova, Lubica Simanova and Katarina Marcinekova
Sustainable Process Performance by Application of Six Sigma Concepts: The Research Study of
Two Industrial Cases
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 260, doi:10.3390/su8030260 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
Andrzej Bialas
Risk Management in Critical Infrastructure—Foundation for Its SustainableWork
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 240, doi:10.3390/su8030240 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
Joanna Kurowska-Pysz
Opportunities for Cross-Border Entrepreneurship Development in a Cluster Model Exemplified
by the Polish–Czech Border Region
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 230, doi: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
Jinhuan Tang, Shoufeng Ji and Liwen Jiang
The Design of a Sustainable Location-Routing-Inventory Model Considering Consumer
Environmental Behavior
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 211, doi:10.3390/su8030211 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
Adam Jabło ´ nski
Scalability of Sustainable Business Models in Hybrid Organizations
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 194, doi:10.3390/su8030194 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182
M. Isabel S´anchez-Hern´andez, Dolores Gallardo-V´azquez, Agnieszka Barcik and
Piotr Dziwi´ nski
The Effect of the Internal Side of Social Responsibility on Firm Competitive Success in the
Business Services Industry
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 179, doi:10.3390/su8020179 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
v
Chia-NanWang, Xuan-Tho Nguyen and Yen-HuiWang
Automobile Industry Strategic Alliance Partner Selection: The Application of a Hybrid DEA
and Grey Theory Model
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 173, doi:10.3390/su8020173 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
Marzanna Katarzyna Witek-Hajduk and Piotr Zaborek
Does Business Model Affect CSR Involvement? A Survey of Polish Manufacturing and Service
Companies
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 93, doi:10.3390/su8020093 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250
Courage Matobobo and Isaac O. Osunmakinde
Analytical Business Model for Sustainable Distributed Retail Enterprises in a Competitive
Market
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 140, doi:10.3390/su8020140 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
El˙zbieta Izabela Szczepankiewicz and Przemysław Mu´cko
CSR Reporting Practices of Polish Energy and Mining Companies
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 126, doi:10.3390/su8020126 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289
Barbara Ko˙zuch and Katarzyna Sienkiewicz-Małyjurek
Inter-Organisational Coordination for Sustainable Local Governance: Public Safety
Management in Poland
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 123, doi:10.3390/su8020123 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306
Liliana Hawrysz and Joachim Foltys
Environmental Aspects of Social Responsibility of Public Sector Organizations
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 19, doi:10.3390/su8010019 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 327
Jingxiao Zhang, Haiyan Xie, Klaus Schmidt and Hui Li
A New Systematic Approach to Vulnerability Assessment of Innovation Capability of
Construction Enterprises
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 17, doi:10.3390/su8010017 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 337
NingWang and Runlin Yan
Research on Consumers’ Use Willingness and Opinions of Electric Vehicle Sharing:
An Empirical Study in Shanghai
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 7, doi:10.3390/su8010007 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 362
Jeng-Wen Lin, Pu Fun Shen and Yin-Sung Hsu
Effects of Employees’Work Values and Organizational Management on Corporate Performance
for Chinese and Taiwanese Construction Enterprises
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 16836–16848, doi:10.3390/su71215852 . . . . . . . . . . . . 380
Chanwoo Cho and Sungjoo Lee
How Firms Can Get Ideas from Users for Sustainable Business Innovation
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059, doi:10.3390/su71215802 . . . . . . . . . . . . 393
Gianluigi De Mare, Maria Fiorella Granata and Antonio Nestic`o
Weak and Strong Compensation for the Prioritization of Public Investments: Multidimensional
Analysis for Pools
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038, doi:10.3390/su71215798 . . . . . . . . . . . . 414
Joanna Radomska
The Concept of Sustainable Strategy Implementation
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2015, 7, 15847–15856, doi:10.3390/su71215790 . . . . . . . . . . . . 431
vi
Jeng-Wen Lin, Pu Fun Shen and Bing-Jean Lee
Repetitive Model Refinement for Questionnaire Design Improvement in the Evaluation of
Working Characteristics in Construction Enterprises
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2015, 7, 15179–15193, doi:10.3390/su71115179 . . . . . . . . . . . . 441
Seungkyum Kim, Changho Son, Byungun Yoon and Yongtae Park
Development of an Innovation Model Based on a Service-Oriented Product Service System
(PSS)
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449, doi:10.3390/su71114427 . . . . . . . . . . . . 453
Mateusz Lewandowski
Designing the Business Models for Circular Economy—Towards the Conceptual Framework
Reprinted from: Sustainability 2016, 8, 43, doi:10.3390/su8010043 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 472
vii

About the Special Issue Editor
Adam Jabło ´ nski is an associate professor Ph.D. at the WSB University in Pozna´ n, Faculty in
Chorz´ow, Poland, Institute of Management. President of the Board of the consulting company
“OTTIMA plus” Ltd. Katowice and Vice-President of the Association Southern Railway Cluster. He
holds a postdoctoral degree in Economic Sciences, specializing in Management Science. He is the
author of a variety of studies and business analyses in the value management, risk management,
balanced scorecard, and corporate social responsibility fields. He has also written and co-written
several monographs and over 100 scientific articles in the field of management, published both in
Poland and in abroad.
His scientific interests include issues of modern and efficient business model design, including
sustainable business models and the principles of company value-building strategies that include
the rules of corporate social responsibility. He is also interested in business models and their key
attributes. He has explored various features of business models, especially focusing on the design and
operationalization of business models in a network environment. He has studied the mechanisms
that shape business models in a network environment, searching for universal principles, which are
a source of further scientific exploration in this area.
Currently, he is also a member of Scientific Boards of International Journals and he is the scientific
reviewer in 10 entities (USA, India, Denmark, Germany), and in Scientific Boards of National Journals
he is a scientific reviewer in nine entities.
ix

Preface to ”Sustainable Business Models”
The dynamically changing world economy, which is in an era of intensive development and
globalization, creates new needs in both the theoretical models of management and in the practical
discussion related to the perception of business. Because of new economic phenomena related to
the crisis, there is a need for the design and operationalization of innovative business models for
companies. Due to the fact that in times of crisis, the principles of strategic balance are particularly
important, these business models can be sustainable business models. Moreover, it is essential to
skillfully use different methods and concepts of management to ensure the continuity of business. It
seems that sustainable business models, in their essence, can support companies’ effectiveness and
contribute to their stable, sustainable functioning in the difficult, ever-changing market.
This Special Issue aims to discuss the key mechanisms concerning the design and
operationalization of sustainable business models, from a strategic perspective. We invite you to
contribute to this Issue by submitting comprehensive reviews, case studies, or research articles.
Papers selected for this Special Issue are subject to a rigorous peer review procedure, with the aim of
rapid and wide dissemination of research results, developments, and applications.
Adam Jabło ´ nski
Special Issue Editor
xi

sustainability
Article
A Balanced Scorecard of Sustainable Management in
the Taiwanese Bicycle Industry: Development of
Performance Indicators and Importance Analysis
Chih-Chao Chung 1, Li-Chung Chao 1, Chih-Hong Chen 2 and Shi-Jer Lou 3,*
1 Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, National Kaohsiung First University of
Science and Technology, Kaohsiung City 824, Taiwan; justin640513@yahoo.com.tw (C.-C.C.);
chaolc@nkfust.edu.tw (L.-C.C.)
2 Department of Modern Languages, National Pingtung University of Science and Technology, Pingtung 912,
Taiwan; andrewchc@mail.npust.edu.tw
3 Graduate Institute of Technological and Vocational Education,
National Pingtung University of Science and Technology, Pingtung 912, Taiwan
* Correspondence: lou@mail.npust.edu.tw; Tel.: +886-8-770-3202
Academic Editors: Adam Jabło ´ nski and Marc A. Rosen
Received: 5 February 2016; Accepted: 25 May 2016; Published: 28 May 2016
Abstract: The main purpose of this study is to investigate the development of the performance
indicators of sustainable management in the Taiwanese bicycle industry and to perform an importance
analysis. Based on the Balanced Scorecard concept, the framework of sustainable management is
added. Ten experts evaluated the performance indicators of a sustainable Balanced Scorecard in
the Taiwanese bicycle industry using five major categories: (1) Financial, (2) Customer, (3) Internal
Business Processes, (4) Learning and Growth, and (5) Sustainable Development, and a total of
21 performance indicators were used. The analytic network process (ANP) was used to perform
an importance analysis of the various performance indicators. Most of the experts suggested that
for the introduction of a sustainable management strategy into the bicycle industry in Taiwan, it
is necessary to include the definition of sustainable management and to improve five performance
indicators: innovation process, customer satisfaction, operations process, after-sales service, and
market share. According to the analysis results, this study proposed relevant management definitions
and suggestions to be used as important references for decision-makers to understand the introduction
of sustainable management strategies to the current bicycle industry in Taiwan.
Keywords: balanced scorecard; performance indicator; ANP; sustainable management; bicycle industry
1. Introduction
In today’s complex and changing business environment, enterprises must carefully develop their
business strategies to gain a competitive advantage over the long term. Therefore, how to plan and
formulate strategies for enterprises plays a decisive role. With the development of environmental
awareness and sustainability, market value is no longer dominated by a single performance indicator;
instead, the triple bottom line (TBL) framework integrates economic, environmental, and social
performance [1,2]. It has become an international focus to actively implement environmental protection
and social responsibility. Therefore, the implementation of a new strategy in response to this trend is
necessary for enterprises to remain competitive. Additionally, the issue of how to effectively integrate
existing and future strategies to enhance competitiveness is an important issue that enterprises
must consider.
Taiwan is known as the “Bicycle Kingdom” due to excellent manufacturing technology, successful
market segmentation, and high profitability [3]. The current trends of global warming, environmental
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518; doi:10.3390/su8060518 1 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
consciousness, sports and leisure activities, and high international oil prices are beneficial to the
development of the bicycle industry. In view of these considerations, if the Taiwanese bicycle
industry can conform to current environmental concerns, actively apply a sustainable business strategy,
and maintain business leaders who assume industry responsibility, then the international image of
Taiwan-made bicycles and industrial competitiveness would be enhanced.
Based on the Balanced Scorecard concept, this study includes the definition of sustainable
management to develop performance indicators of a sustainable Balanced Scorecard for the bicycle
industry. This study uses the characteristics of the ANP to perform an importance analysis of the
priority of the various performance indicators in the bicycle industry. In addition, the study is intended
to help decision-makers understand the focus of the introduction of a sustainable management strategy.
Specifically, the research objectives concerning a sustainable Balanced Scorecard for the bicycle industry
of Taiwan are as follows:
(1) to develop performance indicators;
(2) to investigate the importance analysis of the performance indicators;
(3) to summarize the management definition of the importance of the performance indicators.
2. Literature Review
The trends in sustainable management strategy will be reviewed and the application of a Balanced
Scorecard will be discussed. The bicycle industry’s current status and sustainability issues will be
examined, and the application of the ANP will be illustrated.
2.1. Sustainable Management Strategy
The Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development states that humankind
now faces economic, social, and environmental threats. Human beings must have the ability to continue
to develop and to meet their actual needs, but humanity should not jeopardize the wellbeing of the
next generation. This can be accomplished by applying the concepts of fairness, sustainability, and
commonality [4]. However, the general measure of business performance can be broadly divided into
three dimensions: financial performance, business performance, and organizational performance [5].
As the environment changes, companies should not pursue profit maximization as their primary goal;
efforts should be made to meet the public’s expectations of businesses, to enhance the corporate image,
and to practice sustainable management [6]. To the stakeholders (consumers, shareholders, employees,
communities, suppliers, and governments), organizations have a duty to maximize their positive
impacts while minimizing the negative ones. Studies have suggested that in the future a multinational
corporation will need to comply with more than 60 different environmental and societal norms [7].
Issues related to social aspects are gradually taken seriously. Many companies have been engaged in
social responsibility and social welfare to strengthen their performance in terms of these social aspects.
Moreover, the evaluation of business performance has gradually transformed into the triple bottom
line framework, which consists of economic, environmental, and social performance [1,2]. The triple
bottom line includes a financial baseline, an environmental baseline, and a social baseline. The financial
baseline refers to a company’s financial benefits, as shown by its financial report. The environmental
baseline focuses on a company’s performance in terms of sustainable management, which requires
that the company not damage the sustainability of natural capital. Related environmental indicators
include compliance with environmental laws and standards, environmental management systems,
energy use, waste disposal, recycling, and the use of eco-technology. The social baseline focuses on
social capital and the maintenance and development of human capital. Social capital includes the
mutual trust between members of society and the co-operative relationship. Human capital includes
staff education, investment in health and nutrition, and an emphasis on labor rights. Businesses can
participate in meaningful work, such as the protection of human rights, the abolition of child labor, the
protection of labor and women’s rights, social care, education, and health care [8,9].
2
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
2.2. The Application of the Balanced Scorecard
The Balanced Scorecard (BSC) was developed by a one-year research project funded by the U.S.
management consultancy firm Nolan, Norton & Co. (acquired by KPMG) in 1990 [10]. The program
was created by David Norton, of Nolan–Norton, and Robert Kaplan, a Harvard University professor.
The program aimed to explore “the future overall performance evaluation system of the organization”.
The strategy performance measurement system covered four dimensions: Financial, Customer,
Internal Processes, and Learning and Growth; it is now known as the Balanced Scorecard [11–13].
The application of the Balanced Scorecard is widely employed. In response to different organizational
patterns, characteristics, and life cycles, there are different focal points, including balanced financial
and non-financial indexes, balanced internal and external composing factors, balanced lead–lag
relationships of information, and balanced short-term performance and long-term value [14,15].
For example, there are benefits to linking activity-based costing regarding gross profit with the Balanced
Scorecard after the Balanced Scorecard has been implemented [12]. Fletcher and Smith [16] discuss
how, by integrating the analytic hierarchy process technique with the Balanced Scorecard, performance
indicators can be established to objectively assess the performance of enterprises. In addition, the
Balanced Scorecard can also be utilized in evaluating the performance of suppliers, particularly when
choosing them [17,18]. The four dimensions are explained as follows.
(1) Financial perspective
The financial perspective is the ultimate goal of the four dimensions of the Balanced Scorecard; it
represents the financial performance of its operations [11]. It is primarily the intersection between the
interests of the shareholders and the financial impact of strategic objectives [19]. For most businesses,
it is nothing more than the pursuit of revenue growth, increasing productivity, cost reduction, financial
risk management, and other issues [10].
(2) Customer perspective
The customer perspective primarily concerns how the company can create major core values to
the customer through policy and action [19]. The customer and market segments in which a business
unit competes and the measures of the business unit’s performance in these targeted segments are
sources of revenue for the company to achieve its financial goals. [12]. The customer perspective can
be categorized into market share, customer acquisition, customer retention, customer satisfaction, and
customer profitability. Companies must amend the target based on the customers who will generate
the most expected profit and the greatest potential for revenue growth.
(3) Internal business process perspective
The main difference between the Balanced Scorecard setting goals and traditional performance
measurement systems is the inclusion of the internal business process. Kaplan and Norton state that
before designing the internal processes of the measurable performance indicators, the business value
chain should be analyzed. Based on the innovation process, the operation process, and post-sales
service, the internal processes can be implemented such that customer needs are met in an optimal
manner [20]. The beginning of the value chain of the internal business process perspective is the
innovation process, which clarifies the current and future customer needs. New products are developed
to meet and create customer needs. Next, the operation process focuses on providing products and
services to existing customers. Finally, the post-sales service process, which includes defective products
and returns, is accounted for.
(4) Learning and growth perspective
The Learning and Growth perspective is about how to improve the competitiveness of the
organization and its human resources to accept the challenges to be faced in the future [19]. This
3
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
perspective has three major core objectives—employee capabilities; information system capabilities;
and motivation, empowerment, and alignment. The financial, customer, and internal business process
perspectives of the Balanced Scorecard reveal gaps between the desired and actual ability of employees,
systems, and procedures. To narrow these gaps, companies must invest to advance staff skills,
strengthen information technology systems, and adjust organizational procedures and daily operations
so that employee satisfaction is enhanced, and staff retention rates and employee productivity are
maximized [11].
In summary, based on the structure of the Balanced Scorecard, there are implications for balancing
the external metrics, such as stakeholders and customers, with the key internal metrics, such as internal
processes, innovation and learning, and growth [21,22]. Because the Balanced Scorecard is an open
system, when the interests of all stakeholders and institutions succeed as part of an integral strategy,
these interests can be integrated into it [20]. Therefore, this study is based on the original structure of
the Balanced Scorecard and therefore integrates the environmental and social perspectives to form
new perspectives in order to achieve economic, social, and environmental objectives that also provide
the possibility of sustainable development [21,23,24].
2.3. Current Status of the Bicycle Industry
The bicycle industry in Taiwan has been developing for the last 50 years. The foundation of the
its industrial development was previous domestic transportation and loading operations. From 1971
to 1974, the bicycle industry in Taiwan has helped foreign manufacturers earn gross profits in the
form of large ODM orders. Hence, a superb manufacturing technology and a supply chain network
consisting of many small and medium enterprises has been developed [25]. With the collaboration of
industry, government, academia, and research, the bicycle industry in Taiwan has moved toward the
development of entrepreneurial firms. The title “Superior Bicycle Kingdom” was won by focusing on
advancing quality and establishing domestic brands [26].
Since 2005, the government has proposed a transportation-industry promotion plan that targets
the shaping of an international image of superior bicycles and the production of parts and components
in Taiwan. Combined with industry, government, academia, and other research resources, the bicycle
industry in Taiwan has been continuously developing new materials and innovative features that
incorporate lightweight components, electronics, and ergonomics, as well as meet the demand for
good-value and high-grade products [27].
By developing bicycle product design and research and development capabilities, new features
of domestic products and the high-tech image have been enhanced. Therefore, the value added and
product competitiveness has been increased. New features and new materials have been developed
and integrated to create a technological environment able to promote product differentiation with
the mainland products. With a leading position in bicycle stores, the bicycle industry in Taiwan has
delivered more differentiated and innovative products in the international market [27,28]. The bicycle
industry in Taiwan has successfully established a well-known international brand and marketing
channels with the collaborative work of the government and private industry, and now strives to
transform into an international high-quality research and development center and sales center [3].
In summary, the bicycle industry in Taiwan has gradually transformed from a manufacturing
industry into one combined with a service industry. The market segments are targeted with the
development of innovative, high-quality bicycle products and services compared with the bicycle
industries of other countries. However, the bicycle industry’s business strategy is less refined. Therefore,
this study emphasizes that the bicycle industry must respond to the current trend, pay attention to the
environment and sustainability issues, and create an excellent image with the superiority of a leading
brand. To maintain the competitive advantage of the bicycle industry, a sustainable business strategy
involving the image and products of the company must be actively initiated.
4
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
2.4. Analytic Network Process (ANP)
The analytic network process is a generalized model of the analytic hierarchy process; both
were proposed by Thomas L. Saaty [29]. In recent years, the analytic hierarchy process (AHP) has
been widely used in many problems involving system decision-making. This method concerns the
division of system levels, considering one-way influence between the hierarchy, and assumes that
elements of the same level are individually independent. However, there are many cases involving
elements of interdependent and feedback relationships in decision-making problems; AHP cannot
incorporate these connections [30]. Bentes, Carneiro, Silva, and Kimura [31] discuss the restrictions of
an integration of BSC and AHP in the multidimensional assessment of organizational performance in
a Brazilian telecom company. For example, there must be a hierarchical approach among the elements,
assuming that there is no interaction between independent elements, or a sensitivity analysis cannot
be performed to verify whether results are reasonably stable. Therefore, ANP, proposed by Saaty in
1996, included the characteristics of interdependence and feedback, enabling scholars and experts
to apply it to a wide range of issues [32,33]. AHP is actually a special case of ANP; AHP assumes
that there is independent influence between the relevant factors of an issue, while ANP assumes that
there are mutually influential relations among factors [34]. ANP, like AHP, can reach a consensus of
all decision-making through a specific method, but it has a relatively deeper level of consideration
compared with AHP. The application of ANP consists of assessing the priority value of each object
and establishing an interdependence relationship as well as a network between various objectives and
guidelines. Accordingly, ANP not only considers the practical problems with dependent characteristics
in programs and guidelines but also possesses a feedback mechanism to handle human society’s real
and complex problems [35].
The construction and the steps of implementing the ANP are as follows.
(1) The construction of decision problems system
By investigating the interaction between various criteria, the overall structure of the decision
problem network map is constructed. If there is an influence of the criteria on the overall structure,
it is an outer dependence; if there is an influence between the sub-criteria involved in each criterion
group, it is an inner dependence.
(2) Pairwise comparisons between various groups and guidelines
After the relationship mentioned above is established, groups with dependencies or feedback
relationships are pair-wise compared in the AHP methods with a comparison scale from 1 to 9 [36].
Questionnaires to all the experts are arranged as follows: by taking the geometric mean as the input
value, the comparison matrices are compiled. Each comparison matrix is required for consistency
analysis, and when the consistency ratio (C.R.) ď0.1, it can be accepted; the paired comparison
questionnaires can be considered to be valid questionnaires [37,38]. Then,
C.R. “ C.I.{R.I. (1)
where C.I. is the consistency index and R.I. is random inconsistency.
(3) Building a super-matrix
After pairwise comparisons, the vector of each matrix can be calculated. All the vectors included
within the matrix form the unweighted super-matrix. The weight of the same element within the
unweighted matrix is multiplied by the relating number of community so that all straight fields add
up to 1, resulting in the weighted super-matrix.
5
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
(4) The super-matrix of limiting calculation of decision problems
To obtain a state of long-term stability, the weighted super-matrix is multiplied by itself repeatedly
until convergence, where in each column and field the numbers are equal; this can be expressed as the
following limit of the weighted super-matrix:
Wlim “ lim
kÑ8
´
Wweighted
¯k
. (2)
(5) The advantageous arrangement of feasibility plans
According to the various possible solutions and standards between each feature vector in the
matrix to obtain the whole feature vector, one can find the best solution.
(6) Sensitivity analysis of the decision problem
The decision problem can be performed through sensitivity analysis to analyze the strength of
the overall arrangement. This allows policy makers to see how the results change when a certain
input value changes and to observe whether the result is stable after the order is changed. Therefore,
policymakers can choose the proposed plan with more confidence.
ANP has a wide range of applications in addition to the use of multi-target and multi-criteria
decision-making. It can access and evaluate the relative importance of a number of indicators to
determine the most suitable solution and be an important reference for the organization’s resource
allocation and policy construction [39,40]. The main purpose of this study is to select the performance
indicators of a sustainable strategy for the bicycle industry and to assess the relative importance of
performance indicators. The bicycle industry can therefore adopt this model as an important reference
for further sustainable decision-making.
3. Research Design and Methods
This study refers to Incorporating Design Thinking into Sustainable Business Modeling by Lehmann,
Bocken, Steingrimsson, and Evans [41] to construct the bicycle sustainable management Balanced
Scorecard performance indicators ANP assessment model. By integrating the value mapping tool [42]
and different notions and concrete cogitations that focus the design process around the concerns,
interests, and values of humans in an iterative and interactive way [43], the interaction design is
assembled. This study design is divided into three stages. The detailed process of the study is shown
in Figure 1, and the project team work is listed in Table 1.
The first stage is based on the four aspects of the Balanced Scorecard: the analysis of sustainable
management and the literature review of the bicycle industry to summarize how the assessment
dimensions and criteria can be incorporated into the bicycle industry’s sustainable development
strategy. The second stage is to draw on the experience and opinions of experts by using a questionnaire
survey of the key elements of sustainable management strategies selected from all facets and important
projects and to determine the correlation between the key elements as the basis for constructing the
ANP evaluation model. The third stage is to construct the ANP evaluation model and to include
analysis of the dependency of the relevance among the criteria. With the analysis of the ANP expert
survey results, the relative importance of the key elements emerges to help policy-makers realize the
relevance of sustainable management to Taiwan’s bicycle industry.
6
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
Table 1. Timetable of project team and job description.
Stage Date Number of Participants and Category Research Methods and Job Description
1st Stage
The initial stage 22 May 2015 3 senior managers in the bicycle industry,
4 research team members
Discussion on sustainable development, BSC and ANP,
and other related documents; draw sustainable
development goals for bicycle industry; making list of
experts from industry, academia, research, etc.
Setup of ad hoc
group 19 June 2015
5 bicycle industry experts, 4 academic experts,
3 experts from research and development
center,4 research team members
Convening specialists of sustainable management
from industry, academia, research, and the bicycle
industry to from the ad hoc group
The first meeting of
the ad hoc group 26 June 2015
5 bicycle industry experts, 4 academic experts,
2 experts from research and development
center, 4 research team members
Implementation of focus groups interviews to
understand sustainable performance indicators in
bicycle industry; making lists of indicators of
sustainable development; draft expert questionnaire to
be drawn; description and practice of BSC and ANP
Research Tools
2nd Stage
The 2nd meeting of
the ad hoc group 10 July 2015
4 bicycle industry experts, 4 academic experts,
3 experts from research and development
center, 4 research team members
Implementation of expert questionnaire to determine
the BSC sustainable development indicators in bicycle
industry
The 3rd meeting of
the ad hoc group 31 July 2015
4 bicycle industry experts, 4 academic experts,
3 experts from research and development
center, 4 research team members
Implementation of focus groups to understand the
importance of performance indicators of sustainable
management in bicycle industry and to determine the
relevance; the construction of ANP model; and the
development and drafting of an AHP
experts questionnaire
3rd Stage
The 4th meeting of
the ad hoc group 14 August 2015
5 bicycle industry experts, 4 academic experts,
2 experts from research and development
center, 4 research team members
Implementation of experts questionnaire; consistency
check of ANP experts questionnaire; verification of the
relative importance of BSC sustainable development
indicators of bicycle industry
The 5th meeting of
the ad hoc group 11 September 2015
4 bicycle industry experts, 4 academic experts,
2 experts of research and development center,
4 research team members
The proposal of importing sustainable development
strategy in bicycle industry in accordance with the
importance weight of sustainable development
indicators
Final report
composing 30 October 2015 4 research team members Final report composing in reference to the findings
and recommendations of the experts
7
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
Performance
evaluation of BSC
Bicycle industry
Literature review
Expert survey
Key elements in each dimension
of sustainable development
The correlation of the key elements
ANP Expert survey
Consistency test
The sustainable development strategy and ANP evaluation model in bicycle industry
Sustainable
management
Dimensions of sustainable development Important criteria of dimensions
1st stage
2nd stage
3rd stage
Introduction and analysis
Figure 1. Research design flow.
3.1. Experts Survey
The opinions of experts on research and experience related to the bicycle industry and on
sustainable management are assessed by the important criteria as summarized from the literature
given importance ratings based on subjective value judgments. To obtain an expert rating for each
project, an index of the questionnaire selection model is constructed on a scale of 0 to 1. The closer to 1,
the higher importance the item holds. The opinions of industry, government, and academic experts are
integrated to yield the analysis topics and construct the key factors in sustainable development in the
bicycle industry.
3.2. The Analytic Network Process
This study adds a fifth dimension, the sustainable development aspect, into the traditional
Balanced Scorecard. With the application of dependent characteristics of main criteria and sub-criteria
among the decision problems of ANP elements, the relative importance criteria of sustainable
management strategies and the bicycle industry are assessed by using Super Decisions software
to analyze the results of the research. To increase the reliability of the results of the questionnaire
analysis, the expert survey needs to be checked with consistency analysis. Those questionnaires that
meet the standards are valid, and for those that do not meet the standards, the experts shall make
further revisions. Finally, all valid expert questionnaire data are calculated by the geometric average
number as a whole ANP expert questionnaire data.
3.3. Target Respondents
The perspective of sustainable management strategy in the bicycle industry is extensive, and
there are different views from different angles. Therefore, in selecting target respondents, professional
competence of the experts, the familiarity and authority of the study of topics are the considerations
of the expert selection. The number of experts should preferably be five to 15 people because error
can be reduced to a minimum with a group of at least 10 people, and the reliability is the highest [44].
8
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
This study requests 12 experts to participate in the expert survey and ANP questionnaire, with
10 questionnaires of effective recovery; the overall response rate was 83%. The background information
of the interviewees is shown in Table 2. Professional fields are bicycle industry management, bicycle
R&D, sustainable development, and corporate social responsibility. The target respondents adequately
covered the scope of this study and hold at least eight years of experience in teaching or in industry to
provide the most comprehensive and professional advice.
Table 2. Experts’ background information.
Catalogue Detailed Catalogue A B C D E F G H I J Num.
Category
Industry v v v v 4
Academia v v v v 4
R&D Center v v 2
Educational
background
Ph.D. v v v v 4
Master’s v v v v v 5
Bachelor’s v 1
Years
More than 15 years v v v v 4
10 to 15 years v v v v v 5
5 to 10 years v 1
position
General Manager/Professor v v v v 4
Manager/Associate Professor v v 2
Assistant Manager/Assistant
Professor v v v v 4
Profession
Bicycle Industry Management v v v v v v 6
Bicycle R&D v v v v v v v v 8
Sustainable development v v v v v 5
Corporate Social Responsibility v v v v v v 6
4. Research Results and Analysis
According to the research aim and literature review, the results of analysis are to be made using
the expert survey and the analytic network process. The analysis results are as follows.
4.1. The Analysis of the Expert Survey
This research is accomplished through a literature review examining how the bicycle industry is
introduced to sustainable operation; also considered is the draft of the expert questionnaire design.
According to the views and opinions of the industry experts, they amend and delete ambiguous
pieces and other unsuitable measure of the effectiveness of sustainable projects in the questionnaire.
Finally, four dimensions of the Balanced Scorecard, Financial, Customer, Internal Business Processes,
and Learning and Growth, are collated and analyzed. Additionally, the Sustainable Development
dimension is integrated as the fifth dimension. Along with 27 important projects, the five dimensions
are incorporated into the expert questionnaire design and survey, and the score is calculated by the
geometric mean (M value).
4.1.1. Selection of Key Elements of Sustainable Development
In this study, the result scores of 27 important projects under five dimensions are analyzed,
as shown in Table 3. CS and LR have the highest score (0.864), followed by innovation processes,
restructuring on employees’ expertise, and industrial safety and health (0.826); productivity, cost
management, customers’ continuation rate, and employees’ ability are in third place (0.792). The
quartile scores of the 27 major projects are regarded as the basis of retention or deletion for sustainable
management strategies. Six projects having a lower score than Q1 (Q1 = 0.706) were deleted after a
careful assessment. Therefore, by the collection of the expert questionnaire, 21 key projects are selected
in the study.
9
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
Table 3. Analysis results of expert questionnaire.
Five Dimensions Key Projects MValue SequenceRemark
1. Financial
1-1 revenue growth (RG) 0.761 3 retain
1-2 productivity (PD) 0.792 1 retain
1-3 return on capital employed (RCE) 0.732 4 retain
1-4 cost management (CM) 0.792 1 retain
1-5 risk management (RM) 0.686 5 delete
1-6 investment strategy (IS) 0.663 6 delete
2. Customer
2-1 customer satisfaction (CS) 0.864 1 retain
2-2 customers continuation rate (CCR) 0.792 2 retain
2-3 market share (MS) 0.706 3 retain
2-4 customer profitability (CP) 0.645 5 delete
2-5 customer retention rate (CRR) 0.686 4 delete
3. Internal Business
Processes
3-1 innovation process (IP) 0.826 1 retain
3-2 business processes (BP) 0.761 2 retain
3-3 service (SV) 0.761 2 retain
3-4 information system capabilities (ISC) 0.706 4 retain
3-5 products database management (PDM) 0.663 5 delete
4. Learning and Growth
4-1 employee satisfaction (ES) 0.761 3 retain
4-2 employee continuation rate (ECR) 0.732 4 retain
4-3 employees ability (EA) 0.792 2 retain
4-4 restructuring on employees’ expertise
(REE) 0.826 1 retain
4-5 incentives and authorization (IA) 0.732 4 retain
4-6 supplier management capabilities
(SMC) 0.686 6 delete
5. Sustainable
Development
5-1 environmental protection (EP) 0.710 4 retain
5-2 industrial safety and health (ISH) 0.826 2 retain
5-3 labor rights (LR) 0.864 1 retain
5-4 protection of human rights (PHR) 0.761 3 retain
5-5 social care (SC) 0.710 4 retain
Q1 = 0.706
4.1.2. The Correlation Analysis of Key Elements of Sustainable Development
Experts were invited to evaluate the relationship of mutual influence among various performance
indicators, which were scored according to the level of correlation, as shown in Table 4. Statistical
analyses was performed on the evaluation results of correlation of performance indicators. If the mean
was ě3 and reached significant difference, there was a significant correlation between two performance
indicators. The key project-related outcomes are as shown in Appendix A. Each facet of the key
items is deemed as a relevant necessity in this study; for example, the key dimensions of Financial
perspective, 1-1, 1-2, and 1-4, serve as a key project as the pairwise comparison of essential items in
the ANP internal dependencies, which produce 21 comparison matrices. The external dependency
of key projects between dimensions is regarded as the expert selection results. For instance, in the
Financial performance, key item 1-1 is connected with 2-3, is associated with 3-1 and 3-2, is related to
4-1, 4-3, and 4-5, and is associated with 5-3. Therefore, in the ANP analysis stage, the project must be
considered based on key 1-1 and should carry out pairwise comparison of key 3-1 and 3-2; 4-1, 4-3, and
4-5. As for 2-3 and 5-3, due to the dimension with only one key project associated with 1-1, there is no
need for comparison. According to the external dependency of performance indicators of dimensions,
63 pairs of comparison matrices were generated.
Based on the above considerations, the experts evaluated the correlation of internal and external
dependency of a total of 21 performance indicators in five major categories, and 84 pairs of comparison
10
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
matrices were generated. These were used as the basis to develop the ANP evaluation model of
introduction of Balanced Scorecard of sustainable management into the bicycle industry.
Table 4. Questionnaire of mutual influence and relationship on key projects.
Very Irrelevant Irrelevant Fair Relevant Very
Relevant
1-1 revenue
growth ˝ (1 point) ˝ (2 points) ˝ (3 points) ˝ (4 points) ˝ (5 points) 2-1 customer
satisfaction
4.2. The Analysis of Analytic Network Process (ANP) Expert Questionnaires
Expert questionnaires are utilized to assess the key projects of the bicycle industry adaptation to
the sustainable management strategies, including 27 important projects under five dimensions, and
their relevance, to construct the ANP evaluation model. Statistics and analyses are performed by the
use of expert questionnaires and Super Decisions software. The results are as follows.
4.2.1. The Construction of the ANP Evaluation Model
The ANP evaluation model was established; the goal of decision-making is the bicycle industry’s
adaptation to sustainable management strategies. The five dimensions of the impact to achieve
the target are regarded as the main criteria in the ANP: Financial, Customer, Internal Business
Processes, Learning and Growth, and Sustainable Development. These five main criteria have
a relationship of interdependence and influence. Under each main criterion, 21 sub-criteria are
included; these are key projects that are selected through expert questionnaires, as shown in Figure 2.
Between each sub-criterion, the relationship of interdependence and influence are defined according
to expert opinions.
bicycle industry adapts to the sustainable management strategies
1. Financial performance
2. Customer satisfaction
3. Internal business
processes
4. Learning and growth
5. Sustainable
development
1-1 Revenue growth
1-2 Productivity
1-3 Return on Capital Employed
1-4 Cost Management
2-1 Customer Satisfaction
2-2 Customers continuation rate
2-3 Market share
3-1 Innovation Process
3-2 Business processes
3-3 Service
3-4 Information system capabilities
4-1 Employee Satisfaction
4-2 Employee continuation rate
4-3 Employees’ ability
4-4 Restructuring on employees’
expertise
􁐟􁓰􁆶􀯤􁟾
5-1 Environmental Protection
5-2 Industrial Safety and Health
5-3 Labor rights
5-4 Protection of human rights
5-5 Social Care
Goal Main criterion Sub-criterion
Figure 2. Mutual correlations of performance indicators of sustainable Balanced Scorecard.
11
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
4.2.2. Paired Comparison and Consistency Test
Based on the results of the ANP expert questionnaires, this study is examined for consistency with
the advice of every expert included. Valid questionnaires are calculated with the use of the geometric
mean to find the average. After the integration with the comparison matrix is obtained, the expert
overall consistency test then followed. This study used Super Decisions software to obtain the weight
and CI value of various matrices. The analysis results showed that the C.I. value of all the matrices
was ď0.1, suggesting that there was a certain amount of consistency in paired comparisons obtained
after experts’ preference integration. The weights of various matrices were also highly reliable [36].
The eigenvectors obtained from various matrices were integrated to obtain the initial super-matrix
assessed from the introduction of the sustainable management model into the bicycle industry; the
unweighted super-matrix is shown in Appendix B. Because the unweighted super-matrix is composed
of many paired comparison matrices, it is random. In other words, the total eigenvector of each row is
not equal to 1. Therefore, it is necessary to adjust the unweighted super-matrix to conform to the basic
principle of randomization of ANP theory.
In terms of the adjustment method, this study aligned the matrix of relative weights of various
dimensions under the influence of various evaluation dimensions to obtain the complete cluster matrix,
as shown in Table 5. Then, the cluster matrix was multiplied by the unweighted super-matrix to
make the total of each row become 1 and form the weighted super-matrix, as shown in Appendix
C. According to ANP theory, the continuous squaring of the weighted super-matrix can obtain a
convergent extreme super-matrix, as shown in Table 6. At the same time, the weight of each indicator
will be close to a fixed value. The final results of priority of importance of performance indicators
obtained using the ANP and the analyses are summarized in the table.
Table 5. Cluster matrix.
Main Criteria FinancialCustomer Internal Business
Processes
Learning and
Growth
Sustainable
Development
Financial 0.151 0.161 0.193 0.135 0.187
Customer 0.265 0.248 0.251 0.251 0.176
Internal Business
Processes 0.266 0.276 0.240 0.270 0.166
Learning and
Growth 0.207 0.194 0.199 0.197 0.217
Sustainable
Development 0.110 0.121 0.117 0.147 0.255
12
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
Table 6. Weights analysis table of sub-criteria to sustainable business strategy.
Main Criteria Sub-Criteria Weights
Sequence under
Each Main
Criterion
Overall
Ranking
Financial
1-1 revenue growth 0.016 4 21
1-2 productivity 0.039 2 11
1-3 return on capital employed 0.062 1 6
1-4 cost management 0.036 3 14
Customer
2-1 customer satisfaction 0.095 1 2
2-2 customers continuation rate 0.035 3 15
2-3 market share 0.074 2 4
Internal Business
Processes
3-1 innovation process 0.106 1 1
3-2 business processes 0.080 2 3
3-3 service 0.063 3 5
3-4 information system
capabilities 0.036 4 13
Learning and
Growth
4-1 employee satisfaction 0.055 1 7
4-2 employee continuation rate 0.024 5 19
4-3 employees’ ability 0.040 3 10
4-4 restructuring on employees’
expertise 0.026 4 18
4-5 incentives and authorization 0.046 2 8
Sustainable
Development
5-1 environmental protection 0.039 2 12
5-2 industrial safety and health 0.042 1 9
5-3 labor rights 0.032 3 16
5-4 protection of human rights 0.021 5 20
5-5 social care 0.031 4 17
4.3. Analysis of the Relative Importance of Each Criterion Adapting to Sustainable Business Strategy
In addition, the key projects that further affect the bicycle industry adaptation to the sustainable
management strategies are prioritized; both the analysis of the various dimensions of the main criteria
and the overall analysis are clarified in detail.
4.3.1. Individual Analysis of Dimensions of the Main Criteria
As shown in Table 6, under the dimensions of the main criteria, the relative importance of
sub-criteria is described below.
(1) Under the “Financial” main criterion, 1-3 “Return on Capital Employed” features the highest
eigenvectors (0.062); 1-2 “productivity” followed (0.039). This shows that to improve financial
performance of sustainable development, promoting the use of return on capital employed and
productivity must be addressed.
(2) Under the “Customer” main criterion, 2-1 “Customer Satisfaction” features the highest
eigenvectors (0.095), 2-3 "market share" followed (0.075). This shows that to improve customer
satisfaction in sustainable management, sustainable concepts must meet customer requirements
to advance customer satisfaction and market share.
(3) Under the “Internal Business Processes” main criterion, 3-1 “innovation process” features
the highest eigenvectors (0.106), 3-2 “business processes” followed (0.080). This shows that
internal processes under sustainable management must focus on changing the process of
innovation and the nature of the enterprise, and then be implemented in the company's internal
operational processes.
(4) Under the “Learning and Growth” main criterion, 4-1 “employee satisfaction” features the highest
eigenvectors (0.055), 4-5 “incentives and authorization” followed (0.046). This shows that Learning
13
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
and Growth of enterprises under sustainable management must address employee satisfaction
and emphasize employee incentives and sufficient authorization to improve the efficiency of
learning and growth of the organization.
(5) Under the “sustainable development” main criterion, 5-2 “industrial safety and health” features
the highest eigenvectors (0.042), followed by 5-1 “environmental protection” (0.039). The results
show that under a sustainable management strategy, it is necessary to attach importance to the
internal industrial safety and health of the company and to significantly reduce the use of various
hazardous substances and energies, as well as to make products that are approved by various
international green standard certifications, such as the IECQ QC 080000 hazardous substance
management system standard, or the EU CE Marking to achieve the objectives of environmental
protection and social care.
In summary, the application of ANP carries out an overall assessment to be more rational and
more suitable for the company to determine the results [32]. When faced with the pressure of the
international trend of sustainability, the Taiwanese bicycle industry has to adopt aggressive sustainable
strategies, set up objectives as countermeasures, and use ANP to understand the importance of
various indictors in various dimensions. In this way, the said information can be used as the basis for
determining the priorities under limited resources in the organization. In addition, it can also be used
to measure relative weights of company performance. Therefore, the bicycle industry can focus on the
direction of execution of sustainable management strategies and assess the performance of execution
of strategies to further improve strategy effectiveness.
4.3.2. Overall Analysis
From the overall analysis, most of the experts believe that the top five sub-criteria adapting to
sustainable business strategy are innovation process (0.106), Customer Satisfaction (0.095), business
processes (0.080), service (0.074), and market share (0.063), as shown in Table 6. The results show
that to effectively achieve the overall effectiveness of the adaptation to sustainable management
strategies, it is necessary to strengthen the application of the innovation process and the supply chain
relationships, and mutual trust must be established with long-term interaction and cooperation [28].
Additionally, providing products to meet customer satisfaction is critical. For example, with the same
products, there is now environmental consciousness in customers’ choices, and they tend to buy
products with eco-labels. Meanwhile, business processes within the enterprise must be implemented;
otherwise, the effectiveness of the adaptation of sustainable management strategies will be greatly
reduced [45]. Additionally, companies must plan sustainable services to meet customers’ requirements
for sustainable development, to increase market share, and to accomplish the goal of sustainable
business strategies and benefits.
What is more, there is the added new dimension of the sustainability Balanced Scorecard—sustainable
development, the five sub-criteria of which do not receive a higher rating from experts. They are:
industrial safety and health (0.042), environmental protection (0.039), labor rights (0.032), social care
(0.031), and protection of human rights (0.021). Nevertheless, they should be taken into account.
According to Thomas Saaty, even the smallest factors, as long as they will have an effect, need to be
included in the structure [38]. The results of this study show that most experts believe sustainable
development strategy must be adapted from the comprehensive nature of system processes of the
enterprise, rather than unilateral emphasis and promotion on individual indicators to achieve the
overall effect.
Based on the above, this study used the characteristics of ANP to determine the priority of weights
of each sub-criterion and reflect the current trend of sustainable issues of the bicycle industry in Taiwan.
This study clarifies that with the adaptation of sustainable business strategies, it is also important
to focus on the transformation of the company's internal systems. Under the premise of sustainable
business strategies, innovative approaches are taken to improve enterprise business processes and to
improve customer satisfaction and thus to achieve the goal of sustainable development [3,27].
14
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
5. Conclusions and Recommendations
In accordance with the purposes of this study, research and analysis are conducted; the conclusions,
managerial implications, and suggestions are as follows.
5.1. Conclusions and Managerial Implications
(1) This study attempted to adjust and modify the traditional Balanced Scorecard framework and
used an expert questionnaire to confirm that the introduction of sustainable management strategy
into the bicycle industry should be from five major categories: Financial, Customer, Internal
Business Processes, Learning and Growth, and Sustainable Development. With selection via a
filtering mechanism, the five dimensions contain a total of 21 key projects. The results of the
questionnaire show that the evaluations of the experts are highly consistent. On the managerial
implications, these five dimensions can be regarded as the core of the bicycle industry’s adaptation
to sustainable management strategies, and according to the 21 key projects, the performance
indicators are set correspondingly to measure the effectiveness of the adaptation of sustainable
management strategies.
(2) From prioritizing key projects of various dimensions in the bicycle industry adaptation to
sustainable management strategies, it is known that companies must focus on promoting the
return on capital employed and productivity to improve financial performance. By achieving
customer requirements for sustainable development, customer satisfaction and market share
can be enhanced. The company must also focus on changing the process of innovation and the
nature of enterprise, implemented in the company’s internal operational processes. Furthermore,
companies must pay attention to employee satisfaction and give emphasis to employee incentives
and sufficient authorization to improve the efficiency of learning and growth of the organization.
The company must start with industrial health and safety within and then broaden outward to
the relevant interested parties to achieve the purposes of environmental protection and social care.
In terms of managerial implications, the company can apply ANP to conduct the assessment on
various dimensions, to obtain results that are more rational and more in line with the company’s
features. By confirming the relative importance of the various indicators as the performance
measure in strategy implementation, the strategic direction of the company can be focused to
enhance the effectiveness of the company’s strategy execution.
(3) From the overall analysis of the bicycle industry adaptation to sustainable management strategies,
the three key factors are innovation process, customer satisfaction, and business processes. The
Taiwanese bicycle industry has responded to global sustainable environmental consciousness,
as well as the highly competitive international business. To achieve the goal of sustainable
development, the enterprise itself must have the forces of innovation and of research and
development and be able to grow with trends and to create advantages. The company must
also effectively take hold of the changing needs of customers and improve customer satisfaction.
Moreover, when the industry adapts to the sustainable management strategies, the main point of
implementation is to change the nature of the corporate business processes. As to managerial
implications, if Taiwan’s bicycle industry wants to possess a competitive advantage on the global
stage, the results of this study should be heeded. Innovation process, customer satisfaction, and
business processes must be emphasized to conform to the trend of the times and the environment.
Innovative force must be restored in preparation for sustainable management strategies and to
enable the brand leading the industry to grow.
5.2. Limitations of the Study and Recommendations
This study analyzes the assessment model of the bicycle industry’s adaptation to sustainable
management strategies, giving the practical applications to industry as well as directions for future
research. The recommendations are as follows.
15
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
(1) Practical application to industry
This study analyzes and assesses only those strategies for the sustainable management of the
bicycle industry; hence, the conclusions are not suitable to explain other industries. It is suggested
that decision-makers from the bicycle industry can benefit from the results of this research, which
are the Balanced Scorecard of sustainable management, the five facets, and a total of 21 performance
indicators. They must merge and implement these tools with the company's sustainable management
strategy. Additionally, performance evaluation is suggested to realize the current situation of the
company as a basis for subsequent improvement.
Furthermore, the sustainable management BSC ANP assessment process in this study can also
be referred to, to cope with external environmental factors and the company’s attributes, as well
as to reexamine and assess from a holistic perspective. By using ANP assessment to inspect the
importance of each performance indicator and analyze its connotations for management wishing to
create a concrete and feasible action plan, the implementation of performance indicators and the goal
of sustainable development can be achieved.
(2) Future research
This study is primarily related to the bicycle industry; therefore, the conclusions give priority to
the bicycle industry’s sustainable development. Future research could incorporate the customer views
into the bicycle industry to form the basis of strategic planning. In addition, the Balanced Scorecard
of sustainable management mainly takes the entire bicycle industry as the research object to provide
strategies of sustainable development. Follow-up studies could address individual bicycle businesses
as a case study. Based on the attributes of the company, sustainable business performance assessment
tools can be facilitated to design a more complete and detailed measure, and the performance of
sustainable development strategy can be introduced to businesses so that they can perform quantitative
analysis. In addition, in the current generation of shorter product life cycles, it is recommended to
conduct a one-year period of dynamic monitoring.
The Balanced Scorecard assessment process proposed in this study can be taken into account for
the assessment of future development in the bicycle industry, to manage the dynamics of the bicycle
industry and therefore determine a company’s business direction. Additionally, the bicycle industry
trends and the status performance of the company can be compared to understand a company's
advantages, disadvantages, and opportunities to better facilitate and make the most effective use of
limited resources.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the reviewers for their thoughtful review and
valuable comments.
Author Contributions: Shi-Jer Lou and Li-Chung Chao conceived and designed the experiments;
Chih-Chao Chung and Shi-Jer Lou performed the experiments; Chih-Chao Chung and Chih-hong Chen analyzed
the data; Chih-Chao Chung and Li-Chung Chao contributed reagents/ materials/ analysis tools; Chih-Chao Chung
and Chih-hong Chen wrote the paper.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
16
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
Appendix A
Table A1. Key interrelated projects for the bicycle industry’s adaptation to sustainable management strategies.
No. Key Projects 1-1 1-2 1-3 1-4 2-1 2-2 2-3 3-1 3-2 3-3 3-4 4-1 4-2 4-3 4-4 4-5 5-1 5-2 5-3 5-4 5-5 Comparison Matrix
between Dimensions
1-1 RG V V V V V V V V V V 3
1-2 PD V V V V V V V V V V 4
1-3 RCE V V V V V V V V V V V V V V V 5
1-4 CM V V V V V V V V V 4
2-1 CS V V V V V V V V V V V V V V 5
2-2 CCR V V V V V V V V V V 4
2-3 MS V V V V V V 3
3-1 IP V V V V V V V V V V V V V 5
3-2 BP V V V V V V V V V V V V V V 5
3-3 SV V V V V V V V V V V V V 5
3-4 ISC V V V V V V V V V 3
4-1 ES V V V V V V V V V V V V V V V 5
4-2 ECR V V V V V V V V 3
4-3 EA V V V V V V V V 3
4-4 REE V V V V V V V V V 3
4-5 IA V V V V V V V V V V V V 4
5-1 EP V V V V V V V V V V 4
5-2 ISH V V V V V V V V V V 4
5-3 LR V V V V V V V V V V V V 4
5-4 PHR V V V V V V V V V V V V V 4
5-5 SC V V V V V V V V V V 4
Total 84
Note: ”V” means most experts identified a mutual influence between sub-criteria relationships.
17
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
Appendix B
Table A2. Unweighted super-matrix.
Criteria 1. Financial 2. Customer 3. Internal Business
Processes 4. Learning and Growth 5. Sustainable Development
Sub-Criteria 1-1 1-2 1-3 1-4 2-1 2-2 2-3 3-1 3-2 3-3 3-4 4-1 4-2 4-3 4-4 4-5 5-1 5-2 5-3 5-4 5-5
1.
1-1 RG 0 0.336 0.334 0.312 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.521 0 0 0 0 0.496 0 0 0 0
1-2 PD 0.348 0 0.318 0.365 0.504 0 0 0.508 0.343 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.509 0 0.505 0 0 0
1-3 RCE 0.312 0.306 0 0.323 0.496 0 0 0 0.315 0.482 0.478 0.479 0 0 1.000 0.491 0.504 0.495 1.000 1.000 0.502
1-4 CM 0.340 0.358 0.348 0 0 0 0 0.492 0.341 0.518 0.522 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.498
2.
2-1 CS 0 0 0.508 0.512 0 0.540 0.507 0.531 0.515 0.512 1.000 0.515 0 0 0 0 0.524 0 0.528 0.387 0.513
2-2CCR 0 0 0 0 0.510 0 0.493 0 0 0.488 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.331 0
2-3 MS 1.000 0 0.492 0.488 0.490 0.460 0 0.469 0.485 0 0 0.485 0 0 0 0 0.476 0 0.472 0.282 0.487
3.
3-1 IP 0.523 0.490 0 0.520 0.335 0.485 0.478 0 0.350 0.315 0.327 0.479 0.486 0.490 0.510 0.307 0.530 0.493 0.503 0.476 0.511
3-2 BP 0.477 0.510 0.479 0.480 0 0 0 0.365 0 0.347 0.349 0.521 0.514 0.510 0.490 0.357 0 0.507 0.497 0 0
3-3 SV 0 0 0.521 0 0.366 0.515 0.522 0.328 0.331 0 0.324 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.524 0.489
3-4ISC 0 0 0 0 0.300 0 0 0.307 0.319 0.338 0 0 0 0 0 0.337 0.470 0 0 0 0
4.
4-1 ES 0.340 0.309 0.332 0 0.340 0.487 0 0.324 0.327 0.340 0 0 0.273 0.246 0.257 0.251 0 0.524 0.352 0.367 0
4-2 ECR 0 0 0.337 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.260 0 0.246 0.251 0.247 0 0.476 0.334 0.347 0
4-3 EA 0.339 0.366 0 0.523 0.352 0 0 0 0.348 0.335 0.500 0.278 0.266 0 0.283 0.280 0 0 0 0 0
4-4REE 0 0 0 0 0 0.513 0 0.356 0 0 0 0.259 0.252 0.282 0 0.222 0 0 0.313 0.285 0
4-5 IA 0.321 0.325 0.331 0.477 0.308 0 0 0.320 0.325 0.325 0.500 0.204 0.208 0.226 0.209 0 0 0 0 0 0
5.
5-1 EP 0 0 0.200 0 0.260 0.263 0.509 0.332 0.330 0.512 1.000 0.189 0 0 0 0 0 0.249 0.221 0.229 0.258
5-2 ISH 0 0.510 0.229 0 0.259 0.264 0 0.363 0.369 0 0 0.228 0.492 0.499 0.490 0.375 0.271 0 0.294 0.285 0.251
5-3 LR 1.000 0.490 0.210 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.221 0.508 0.501 0.510 0.323 0.264 0.276 0 0.269 0.249
5-4 PHR 0 0 0.196 0 0.244 0.239 0 0 0 0.488 0 0.190 0 0 0 0 0.241 0.252 0.268 0 0.242
5-5 SC 0 0 0.166 0 0.237 0.234 0.491 0.305 0.301 0 0 0.172 0 0 0 0.302 0.224 0.223 0.217 0.217 0
18
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
Appendix C
Table A3. Weighted super-matrix.
Criteria 1. Financial 2. Customer 3. Internal Business Processes 4. Learning and Growth 5. Sustainable Development
Sub-Criteria 1-1 1-2 1-3 1-4 2-1 2-2 2-3 3-1 3-2 3-3 3-4 4-1 4-2 4-3 4-4 4-5 5-1 5-2 5-3 5-4 5-5
1.
1-1 RG 0 0.069 0.050 0.053 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.070 0 0 0 0 0.118 0 0 0 0
1-2 PD 0.053 0 0.048 0.062 0.081 0 0 0.098 0.066 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.092 0 0.114 0 0 0
1-3 RCE 0.047 0.063 0 0.055 0.080 0 0 0 0.061 0.093 0.092 0.065 0 0 0.180 0.089 0.120 0.112 0.187 0.187 0.120
1-4 CM 0.051 0.074 0.053 0 0 0 0 0.095 0.066 0.100 0.101 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.119
2.
2-1 CS 0 0 0.135 0.153 0 0.159 0.195 0.133 0.129 0.128 0.251 0.129 0 0 0 0 0.118 0 0.093 0.068 0.115
2-2CCR 0 0 0 0 0.126 0 0.189 0 0 0.122 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.058 0
2-3 MS 0.265 0 0.131 0.145 0.121 0.136 0 0.118 0.121 0 0 0.122 0 0 0 0 0.107 0 0.083 0.050 0.109
3.
3-1 IP 0.139 0.178 0 0.156 0.092 0.160 0.205 0 0.084 0.075 0.078 0.129 0.214 0.216 0.184 0.111 0.112 0.099 0.083 0.079 0.108
3-2 BP 0.127 0.185 0.128 0.144 0 0 0 0.088 0 0.083 0.084 0.141 0.226 0.224 0.177 0.129 0 0.102 0.082 0 0
3-3 SV 0 0 0.139 0 0.101 0.169 0.223 0.079 0.079 0 0.078 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.087 0.103
3-4 ISC 0 0 0 0 0.083 0 0 0.074 0.076 0.081 0 0 0 0 0 0.121 0.099 0 0 0 0
4.
4-1 ES 0.070 0.087 0.069 0 0.066 0.113 0 0.065 0.065 0.068 0 0 0.087 0.079 0.067 0.066 0 0.138 0.076 0.080 0
4-2 ECR 0 0 0.070 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.051 0 0.079 0.066 0.065 0 0.125 0.072 0.075 0
4-3 EA 0.070 0.103 0 0.122 0.068 0 0 0 0.069 0.067 0.100 0.055 0.085 0 0.074 0.074 0 0 0 0 0
4-4 REE 0 0 0 0 0 0.119 0 0.071 0 0 0 0.051 0.081 0.090 0 0.058 0 0 0.068 0.062 0
4-5 IA 0.066 0.092 0.068 0.111 0.060 0 0 0.064 0.065 0.065 0.100 0.040 0.067 0.072 0.055 0 0 0 0 0 0
5.
5-1 EP 0 0 0.022 0 0.031 0.038 0.096 0.039 0.039 0.060 0.117 0.028 0 0 0 0 0 0.077 0.056 0.058 0.084
5-2 ISH 0 0.077 0.025 0 0.031 0.038 0 0.043 0.043 0 0 0.034 0.118 0.120 0.096 0.074 0.088 0 0.075 0.073 0.082
5-3 LR 0.110 0.074 0.023 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.033 0.122 0.120 0.100 0.064 0.086 0.085 0 0.069 0.081
5-4 PHR 0 0 0.022 0 0.030 0.034 0 0 0 0.057 0 0.028 0 0 0 0 0.078 0.078 0.068 0 0.079
5-5 SC 0 0 0.018 0 0.029 0.034 0.092 0.036 0.035 0 0 0.025 0 0 0 0.059 0.073 0.069 0.055 0.055 0
19
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
References
1. Elkington, J. Partnerships from cannibals with forks: The triple bottom line of 21st-century business.
Environ. Qual. Manag. 1998, 8, 37–51. [CrossRef]
2. Hubbard, G. Measuring organizational performance: Beyond the triple bottom line. Bus. Strateg. Environ.
2009, 18, 177–191. [CrossRef]
3. Hu, M.-C.; Wu, C.-Y. Exploring technological innovation trajectories through latecomers: Evidence from
Taiwan's bicycle industry. Technol. Anal. Strateg. Manag. 2011, 23, 433–452. [CrossRef]
4. Costanza, R.; Patten, B.C. Defining and predicting sustainability. Ecol. Econ. 1995, 15, 193–196. [CrossRef]
5. Venkatraman, N.; Ramanujam, V. Measurement of business performance in strategy research: A comparison
of approaches. Acad. Manag. Rev. 1986, 11, 801–814.
6. Robbins, S.P. Essentials of Organizational Behavior; Pearson Higher Ed: Boston, MA, USA, 2013.
7. Robins, F. The future of corporate social responsibility. Asian Bus. Manag. 2005, 4, 95–115. [CrossRef]
8. Aaronson, S.A. Corporate responsibility in the global village: The British role model and the American
laggard. Bus. Soc. Rev. 2003, 108, 309–338. [CrossRef]
9. Crook, C. The good company. Economist 2005, 22, 3–18.
10. Kaplan, R.S.; Norton, D.P.; Dorf, R.; Raitanen, M. The Balanced Scorecard: Translating Strategy into Action;
Harvard Business School Press: Boston, MA, USA, 1996; Volume 4.
11. Kaplan, R.S.; Norton, D.P. Transforming the balanced scorecard from performance measurement to strategic
management: Part I. Account. Horiz. 2001, 15, 87–104. [CrossRef]
12. Maiga, A.S.; Jacobs, F.A. Balanced scorecard, activity-based costing and company performance: An empirical
analysis. J. Manag. Issues 2003, 15, 283–301.
13. Álvarez, C.; Rodríguez, V.; Ortega, F.; Villanueva, J. A Scorecard Framework Proposal for Improving
Software Factories’ Sustainability: A Case Study of a Spanish Firm in the Financial Sector. Sustainability 2015,
7, 15999–16021. [CrossRef]
14. Niven, P.R. Balanced Scorecard Step-by-Step: Maximizing Performance and Maintaining Results; John Wiley
& Sons: New York, NY, USA, 2002.
15. Gibbons, R.; Kaplan, R.S. Formal Measures in Informal Management: Can a Balanced Scorecard Change a
Culture? Am. Econ. Rev. Pap. Proc. 2015, 105, 447–451. [CrossRef]
16. Fletcher, H.D.; Smith, D.B. Managing for value: Developing a performance measurement system integrating
EVA and the BSC in strategic planning. J. Bus. Strateg. 2004, 21, 1–17.
17. Bhattacharya, A.; Mohapatra, P.; Kumar, V.; Dey, P.K.; Brady, M.; Tiwari, M.K.; Nudurupati, S.S. Green
supply chain performance measurement using fuzzy ANP-based balanced scorecard: A collaborative
decision-making approach. Prod. Plan. Control 2014, 25, 698–714. [CrossRef]
18. Tjader, Y.; May, J.H.; Shang, J.; Vargas, L.G.; Gao, N. Firm-level outsourcing decision making: A balanced
scorecard-based analytic network process model. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 2014, 147, 614–623. [CrossRef]
19. Epstein, M.J.; Wisner, P.S. Using a balanced scorecard to implement sustainability. Environ. Qual. Manag.
2001, 11, 1–10. [CrossRef]
20. Kaplan, R.S.; Norton, D.P. The Balanced Scorecard: Translating Strategy into Action; Harvard Business Press:
Boston, MA, USA, 1997.
21. Möller, A.; Schaltegger, S. The Sustainability Balanced Scorecard as a Framework for Eco-efficiency Analysis.
J. Ind. Ecol. 2005, 9, 73–83. [CrossRef]
22. De Felice, F.; Petrillo, A.; Autorino, C. Development of a Framework for Sustainable Outsourcing: Analytic
Balanced Scorecard Method (A-BSC). Sustainability 2015, 7, 8399–8419. [CrossRef]
23. Epstein, M.J.; Research, I. Measuring Corporate Environmental Performance: Best Practices for Costing and
Managing an Effective Environmental Strategy; McGraw-Hill: New York, NY, USA, 1996.
24. Schaltegger, S.; Burritt, R. Contemporary Environmental Accounting: Issues, Concepts, and Practice; Greenleaf
Publishing: Sheffield, UK, 2000.
25. Chu,W.-W. Causes of growth: A study of Taiwan’s bicycle industry. Camb. J. Econ. 1997, 21, 55–72. [CrossRef]
26. Yan, H.-D.; Hu, M.-C. Strategic entrepreneurship and the growth of the firm: The case of Taiwan’s bicycle
industry. Glob. Bus. Econ. Rev. 2008, 10, 11–34. [CrossRef]
27. Chen, Y.-S.; Lin, M.-J.; Chang, C.-H.; Liu, F.-M. Technological innovations and industry clustering in the
bicycle industry in Taiwan. Technol. Soc. 2009, 31, 207–217. [CrossRef]
20
Sustainability 2016, 8, 518
28. Brookfield, J.; Liu, R.-J.; MacDuffie, J.P. Taiwan’s bicycle industry A-Team battles Chinese competition with
innovation and cooperation. Strateg. Leadersh. 2008, 36, 14–19. [CrossRef]
29. Saaty, T.L. Fundamentals of the analytic network process-dependence and feedback in decision-making with
a single network. J. Syst. Sci. Syst. Eng. 2004, 13, 129–157. [CrossRef]
30. Rossi, C.; Cricelli, L.; Grimaldi, M.; Greco, M. The strategic assessment of intellectual capital assets:
An application within Terradue Srl. J. Bus. Res. 2016, 69, 1598–1603. [CrossRef]
31. Bentes, A.V.; Carneiro, J.; da Silva, J.F.; Kimura, H. Multidimensional assessment of organizational
performance: Integrating BSC and AHP. J. Bus. Res. 2012, 65, 1790–1799. [CrossRef]
32. Saaty, T.L. Theory and Applications of the Analytic Network Process: Decision Making with Benefits, Opportunities,
Costs, and Risks; RWS Publications: Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2005; Volume 4992.
33. Staš, D.; Lenort, R.; Wicher, P.; Holman, D. Green Transport Balanced Scorecard Model with Analytic
Network Process Support. Sustainability 2015, 7, 15243–15261. [CrossRef]
34. Biondi, S.; Calabrese, A.; Capece, G.; Costa, R.; Di Pillo, F. A New Approach for Assessing Dealership
Performance: An Application for the Automotive Industry. Int. J. Eng. Bus. Manag. 2013, 5, 1–8. [CrossRef]
35. Chung, C.C.; Chao, L.C.; Lou, S.J. The Establishment of a Green Supplier Selection and Guidance Mechanism
with the ANP and IPA. Sustainability 2016, 8, 259–282. [CrossRef]
36. Saaty, T.L. What is the Analytic Hierarchy Process?; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 1988.
37. Saaty, T.L. How to make a decision: The analytic hierarchy process. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 1990, 48, 9–26.
[CrossRef]
38. Saaty, T.L. Multicriteria Decision Making; RWS Publications: Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 1996.
39. Karpak, B.; Topcu, I. Small medium manufacturing enterprises in Turkey: An analytic network process
framework for prioritizing factors affecting success. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 2010, 125, 60–70. [CrossRef]
40. Abdi, M.R.; Labib, A.W. Performance evaluation of reconfigurable manufacturing systems via holonic
architecture and the analytic network process. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2011, 49, 1319–1335. [CrossRef]
41. Lehmann, M.; Bocken, N.M.P.; Steingrímsson, J.G.; Evans, S. Incorporating Design Thinking into Sustainabl.
Business Modelling. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Sustainable, Seville, Spain, 12–14
April 2015.
42. Bocken, N.; Short, S.; Rana, P.; Evans, S. A value mapping tool for sustainable business modelling. Int. J.
Effect. Board Perform. 2013, 13, 482–497.
43. Meinel, C., Leifer, L., Plattner, H., Eds.; Design Thinking; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2011.
44. Dalkey, N.; Helmer, O. An experimental application of the Delphi method to the use of experts. Manag. Sci.
1963, 9, 458–467. [CrossRef]
45. Bossidy, L.; Charan, R.; Burck, C. Execution: The discipline of getting things done. Afp. Exchang. 2004, 24,
26–29.
© 2016 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
21
sustainability
Article
Development of a Novel Co-Creative Framework for
Redesigning Product Service Systems
Tuananh Tran and Joon Young Park *
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Dongguk University, Pil-dong, Jung-gu,
Seoul 100715, Korea; meslab.org@gmail.com
* Correspondence: jypark@dgu.edu; Tel.: +82-222-603-714
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 2 February 2016; Accepted: 28 April 2016; Published: 3 May 2016
Abstract: Product service systems (PSS) have been researched in academia and implemented in
industry for more than a decade, and they bring plenty of benefits to various stakeholders, such
as: customers, PSS providers, the environment, as well as society. However, the adoption of PSS in
industry so far is limited compared to its potentials. One of the reasons leading to this limitation is
that PSS design is tricky. So far, there are several methods to design PSS, but each of them has certain
limitations. This paper proposes a co-creative framework, which is constructed using the concept of
user co-creation. This novel framework allows designers to design PSS effectively in terms of users’
perception of PSS value, design quality and evaluation. The authors also introduce a case study to
demonstrate and validate the proposed framework.
Keywords: product service system; PSS; PSS design; co-creation; PSS redesign; PSS business model
1. Introduction
1.1. Product Service System
Before the 2000s, consumers were familiar with the paradigm in which companies sell tangible
products to the market. For instance: Nokia provided mobile phones; Electrolux provided washing
machines; HP provided printers, etc. Nowadays, the demands of customers become more and more
diversified, and the business environment becomes more and more competitive. This leads to the fact
that companies are having a difficult time competing with the conventional business model of selling
purely tangible products [1,2]. There is a need for finding new ways to enhance competitiveness,
to attract new customers, as well as to keep existing ones. This need is fulfilled by incorporating
the concept of product service systems (PSS) [3–5]. These PSS are a form of servitization in which a
combination of a tangible product and an intangible service, called a “PSS offering” or simply “PSS”,
is provided to the customers [6].
There are several examples of PSS in reality. According to Goedkoop et al. [7], PSS is “a marketable
set of products and services capable of jointly fulfilling a user’s needs”. By this definition, the offering
of an iPhone and the Appstore from Apple Inc. can be considered as a PSS. In the same manner, a
car-sharing service, where the users check in and pick up a car at a station, use and return the car at
another station, check out and pay per use, is also a PSS. In the car-sharing example, users do not
buy the car; they buy the “mobility” or the use of the car. This new concept of buying is similar to a
“functional economy” [8], where customers are interested in “hiring products to get jobs done” [3,9,10].
Baines et al. also introduced a well-known example of a PSS, which is the “document management
solution” [11]. In this example, the customer does not buy a photocopier. Instead, the customer only
buys its use. The company still owns the product and takes care of refilling, maintenance, replacing
parts, etc.
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434; doi:10.3390/su8050434 22 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
Since the very first work by Goedkoop et al. nearly two decades ago, PSS has gone a long way with
various research having been carried out by various researchers. The pioneering works also include the
ones by Mont [8] and Morelli [12]. So far, PSS is classified into several types. According to Tukker [13],
there are three types of PSS: product-oriented PSS, use-oriented PSS and result-oriented PSS.
1.2. Adoption of PSS in Industry
PSS brings benefits to various stakeholders, as studied in the literature [5,11]. For the customers,
PSS provides flexible services with a higher level of personalization, better and continuously-improved
quality and, finally, total satisfaction. For companies, thanks to the implementation of PSS, they gain
the loyalty of customers, as well as better control of product quality, continuous improvement, chances
for reducing costs, increasing knowledge and innovation. For society and the environment, PSS is
also beneficial in terms of reducing materials’ consumption through sharing their use, increasing the
responsibility of manufacturers, expanding the lifecycle of the products and creating more jobs in the
service sector.
PSS is now adopted more and more in industry. In order to promote the adoption of PSS, several
challenges need to be resolved. These challenges were mentioned in various works by Mont [8],
Baines et al. [11] and Beuren et al. [5]. The first challenge is that “ownerless consumption” is not
familiar to the vast majority of customers. They are familiar with the concept of paying and getting
“physical” items. Another challenge is for the manufacturers. They might have difficulties when
making decisions on pricing, managing risks and changing the organization due to a changing business
model. The major challenge for expanding PSS adoption is “PSS design”. This is not an easy task,
because PSS is a complicated system. In PSS, besides products and services, there are also other
elements, such as the delivery network, stakeholders, value proposition, etc.
In order to design PSS, several methods have been introduced. Vasantha et al. reviewed eight
well-known PSS design methods that have been implemented widely so far [6]. As will be analyzed
in Section 2, there is still a lack of an effective method to design PSS collaboratively and practically.
This lack somehow limits the expansion of PSS adoption in industry.
1.3. Motivation for This Work and Research Goal
This research is motivated by the following real-world scenario: Mulenserv is a company that
provides various engineering services to customers in the industrial market. One of Mulenserv’s
services is a PSS, which leases technical manuals and books together with supporting services
(lectures, application workshops, technical contests, etc.). Their target customers are engineering
individuals, as well as small technical companies. This is a niche market, and the PSS is highly
customized due to the diversified demands of various customers. After six months of the initial release,
the response of the market was limited: acceptance of potential customers, as well as satisfaction
of customers who purchased the PSS were lower than expected. The company needs to redesign to
improve the PSS, so that the acceptance rate and customer satisfaction can be improved and the sales
can be increased sustainably. In order to achieve this goal, they need an effective customer-centric
framework to improve the PSS design, i.e., redesign the new PSS starting from the existing one.
According to Vezzoli et al. [14], most of the successful cases of PSS applications are from the B2B
(business to business) sector, not B2C (business to consumer). Mulenserv is a typical B2C case, and a
design solution is needed to help its PSS survive when being launched.
Since customer acceptance and satisfaction with the PSS is of critical importance to its success and
this acceptance strongly depends on the perception of the users of the provided service [14], this paper
aims to develop a co-creative framework that allows companies to redesign a PSS in order to improve
the design of the PSS in terms of users’ perception of its value, design quality and evaluation and, thus,
leading to increasing customer acceptance and, therefore, increasing its success. In this work, we set
the scope of the framework in a B2C environment. We construct this framework by incorporating the
concept of user co-creation.
23
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
The next parts of this paper are organized as follows: Section 2 reviews existing literature that
is related to the research topic. Section 3 analyzes solutions and proposes the framework. Section 4
introduces the case study, the experimental implementation, results and discussions. Section 5 draws
concluding remarks and suggests future work.
2. Literature Review
2.1. Existing Methods to Design and Redesign PSS
PSS providers need tools, techniques and methods to design and enhance their PSS to satisfy
their customers. There has been much research conducted to propose PSS design methodologies with
similar intentions and different ideas [15].
Several methods for designing PSS have been introduced so far [1,2,11]. Beside case-specific
methods, which were developed to design very specific PSSs [16,17], there are several generic methods
that can be used to design various cases of PSS. These methods were summarized by Vasantha et al. [6].
Although being well known and widely implemented, these methods have limitations. One of them
is the lack of user co-creation in the design processes [6]. These methods do not mention in detail
the importance of co-creation, and there are no clear definitions of the roles of customers in the PSS
design process.
More recently, Pezzotta et al. [18] proposed a framework to design and assess PSS from a service
engineering approach. This framework utilizes computer-aided modeling tool for service design.
It starts with functional analysis and the identification of customer needs, simulating and testing
various scenarios to find out the best solution. Although being well structured, this method has little
involvement in co-creation, and the case study provided in the work [18] is more like a B2B case.
Morelli [19] commented that design methods should identify who is involved in the design
process and their roles, as well as possible scenarios that could occur. The need for implementing
customer co-creation is also raised in the work of Beuren et al. [5]. Vezzoli et al. [14] implied that a
design method should include details of where and when to involve stakeholders (producer/provider,
customer, etc.) and to allow customers to customize a PSS according to their preferences.
Beside the lack of co-creation, existing PSS design methods provide little practical guidelines for
practitioners (i.e., companies) [2]. Incorporating incremental steps in a path or practice is necessary
for a design method [14]. There is a lack of illustrating cases that can demonstrate and give insights
into how PSS design methods work in various situations. This explains why existing methods are
not effective in terms of practical implementation. Furthermore, Qu et al. [15] suggested that more
quantitative works need to be conducted in the literature because these works are more objective
and persuasive.
In summary, existing design methodologies have not considerably included co-creation in the
design processes and are not effective enough to act as practical guidelines for practitioners. In this
sense, the involvement of each stakeholder in the design phases is not clarified in detail, and the
representation of PSS itself is complicated. There is a need for a new method that is co-creative with
user involvement in the design process, better defined roles and responsibilities of stakeholders and
a simpler PSS representation and that can provide practical guidelines. This method also need to
be evaluable.
2.2. Value Perception
In a service-oriented system, like a PSS, value perception is a critical issue to decide the buying
potential of customers, because the service part in PSS is intangible and its value is difficult to measure
and estimate [9,11,12]. In order to increase the value perception of PSS, the value of the PSS needs
to be visualized. One of the methods to visualize PSS value is communicating and demonstrating
PSS to the customers [20]. The importance of PSS value and value proposition has been mentioned
in several works [21–23]. In one of the PSS design methods reviewed by Vasantha et al. [6], the value
24
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
proposition is considered as an important dimension that forms the PSS [24]. Value is claimed to be
the differentiating factor that enables the success of a PSS, and new methods are needed to understand
value perception in order to evaluate PSS performance [11].
There are also several notable works on PSS value visualization. The value proposition was
emphasized in the PSS design method proposed by Morelli [12]. Several tools that support value
visualization have been introduced, including the “PSS board” [9] and color-coded CAD models [25].
A framework to enhance value visualization and perception has also been proposed by Kowalkowski
and Kindstrom [20]. The above works focus on either value perception of the company (instead of the
customers) [9,12,25] or value perception particularly in industrial markets [20].
Vezzoli et al. [14] commented that because of the lack of understanding about PSS and the
deep perception of its value, customers are not eager to adopt PSS solutions. This is a barrier for
PSS application at the industrial scale. There is a need for new strategies and approaches to make
consumers accept this new model of consumption.
In order to increase users’ acceptance of PSS offerings, designers must find ways to increase users’
perception of PSS value, and thus, the visualization of PSS becomes critical. In Section 3, the authors of
this work propose a method to represent and present PSS to enhance the communication of PSS value
to the users and enable user participation in co-creation.
2.3. Co-Creation in the Design Improvement and Evaluation of PSS
Steen et al. [26] identified three types of benefits of co-creation for the design project, the customers
and the PSS provider. They did this by reviewing the literature and observing three service design
projects. In that work, experimental results were not reported in terms of numerical data, and they
also implied that there was a need for conducting another experiment and performing a numerical
analysis to validate the effectiveness of user involvement in a service-oriented design project.
The design and development of PSS is a participatory process, and thus, co-creation has been
mentioned in the literature as one of the success enabling factors for PSS [6,11]. Co-creation refers
to the participation of customers or users in various phases of its lifecycle, such as ideation, design,
development and implementation (i.e., use), etc. The role of user participation is critical to the success
because of the importance of users in a PSS model. Users are among the most important stakeholders,
and because of the presence of the “service” part in which users only buy or hire things that help them
to get jobs done [3,9], users’ voices deserve a deep consideration. As pointed out by Vansantha et al., to
improve PSS design, co-creation is employed limitedly in existing PSS design methods [6].
PSS evaluation is an essential issue that has been mentioned by various researchers [9,27–30].
Especially, evaluation at the development stage can help companies to reduce the risks of PSS launching.
Existing PSS design methods do not consider co-creation deep enough [6,11].
There are several works that dealt briefly with the evaluation issue in PSS design.
A “lifecycle simulation” model was proposed by Komoto and Tomiyama [30] and was demonstrated
with a maintenance service. The evaluation of PSS was also considered in the tool developed
by Lim et al. [9]. Another approach to PSS evaluation through prototyping was proposed [28].
These works [9,28,30] focused on the evaluation of PSS mostly for companies, not for customers.
Customers can be used as a source of innovation by involving them in the PSS design
process [1,11,31]. A PSS design process in which the participation of customers is used for evaluation
was proposed by Shih et al. [27]. In other work, an algorithm for PSS evaluation was proposed by
Yoon et al. [28]. However, still, in these works [27,28], customers are not the main drive for making a
difference in the effectiveness of the evaluation result.
We aim to develop a novel co-creative framework that uses the co-creation of customers (i.e., users),
has detailed defined roles, responsibilities and activities of stakeholders throughout the design process
and includes a simple and clear PSS representation. This proposed framework is used to enhance the
value perception, evaluation and design quality of PSS. It starts with the existing PSS or initial PSS
conceptual idea and produces an improved PSS design as the outcome. The PSS that is developed
25
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
using the proposed framework can be better accepted by customers. This leads to the success of PSS
and encourage the application of PSS in industry.
3. Methodology
Figure 1 shows the research procedure of this paper. This explains how we construct this
research. The authors analyze solutions to implement user co-creation and PSS representation. Based on
those analyses and the sequence of co-creative design activities, the authors propose the framework.
This framework is explained in detail and implemented in a case study as an experiment. The results
were collected, analyzed and validated to evaluate the framework.
3.1. Implementation of the Co-Creation Concept
The co-creation of customers/users in the PSS design process can be enabled by the participation
of users in various design activities. Previous research pointed out that allowing users to participate
in the design process might make significant changes [32]. Users can participate in proposing ideas,
suggesting design corrections or even generating new concepts.
As pointed out in a previous work [33], to make user participation become easy and effective, the
co-creation tasks need to be clarified and simplified. In order to achieve this, we carefully train the
participants about each task in which they are involved. We also use simplified PSS representation so
that the users can contribute their innovation properly and systematically.
Figure 1. The research procedure.
3.2. Simplified PSS Representation
In order to simplify co-creation activity and maximize effective participation, we break down PSS
into basic elements so that the representation of PSS can be in the simplest form. When being shown to
the participants, the PSS will be represented as a combination of the following elements:
‚ Product: The tangible part of a PSS, for instance an iPhone.
‚ Service: The intangible part of PSS, for instance the Appstore
26
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
‚ Process: Serial and parallel activities happen inside a PSS. This describes the process of how a PSS
is served to the customer.
‚ Parameters: The metrics of product and service features. For example: how long is the service
time; how much is the charge per mile for a car sharing service, etc.
‚ Network: The infrastructure of PSS showing the interactions of products, services, users, etc.
For example, to deliver technical support services to PC (personal computer) buyers, the company
may use email, telephone, on-site, etc.
‚ Stakeholders: Companies, customers, suppliers, etc.
‚ Value proposition: Model that explains how PSS provides value to a customer, a company and
other stakeholders.
A PSS can be represented in a simple form using a set of the above elements. Each representation
is called a “PSS configuration” or “PSS design” in this work. The purpose of this simplification is to
briefly represent a PSS as a combination of various “specifications”, and thus, it allows users to suggest
PSS designs easily by filling in the form with their favorite inputs for those specifications. We would
like to note that this is for the convenience of user participation, and this simplification is used only
within this work.
3.3. The Proposed Framework
Based on the analysis of solutions and the PSS design process, we propose a framework to enhance
the value perception, evaluation and design quality of PSS. The proposed framework is shown in
Figure 2.
Figure 2. The proposed framework.
The proposed framework can be generally described as follows: The company wants to improve
their current PSS by redesigning it with user co-creation. To do that, they first invite a group of users
(Group 1) to participate. In order to make these users understand the PSS, the company represents
the PSS in a simple form, and then, they prototype the PSS so that the users can actually see and
experience the PSS. After that, these users co-create by suggesting various PSS options that they think
might meet their needs. The company collects inputs from users, analyzes those inputs and produces
new possible PSS designs. After new PSS designs are produced, the company invites another group of
users (Group 2) to participate in prototyping and evaluating the newly-created designs. The designs
will be evaluated by scoring along various criteria, and the one that gains the highest score will be
selected as the winning design. The company will try to improve this design, if possible, and finally,
they have a new PSS that is improved compare to the previous version. The detailed explanation of
the proposed framework, its phases and corresponding methods can be found in Table 1.
27
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
Table 1. Working mechanism of the proposed framework.
Step Tasks Method Implementation of Method
Preparation phase
0
Start
Description: The company has a
PSS to be redesigned or a PSS idea
to design further.
Purpose: This step is the kickoff of
the process.
N/A N/A
1
Representation
Description: The company breaks
down a complex PSS into basic
elements and prepares to
communicate to users so that they
can understand.
Purpose: This step is the
preparation for prototyping and
user co-creation in the next phase.
Method: Simplified PSS
presentation (Section 3.2)
Purpose: This method is used
to make users understand the
PSS well, so that they can
contribute their ideas
effectively (Section 3.1).
A PSS is represented as a
combination of elements,
and the representation is
summarized in a table
(see Table 2 below).
Creation phase
2
Prototype #1
Description: The company
demonstrates the prototype to a
group of users. The users see and
experience how the PSS works.
This prototype can be presented in
the form of a working prototype,
such as: participatory prototyping
or in the form of a storyboard, a
simulation or any media-based
illustration, depending on the
type and characteristics of the PSS.
Purpose: This step makes users
(user Group 1) clearly understand
what the PSS is like and how it
might be provided. By
understanding this, they can
experience the PSS to some extent,
and this allows them to contribute
ideas more properly.
Method: Storyboard and
participatory game
Purpose: The storyboard
explains briefly the PSS
structure and mechanism, as
well as elements and
parameters, while the
participatory game actually
allows users to experience the
PSS themselves by playing
roles in the PSS process.
The PSS is introduced to the
users firstly in the form of a
storyboard, which explains
what is included and how
the PSS is provided (process,
parameters, etc.). After that,
the users are invited to
participate in the
participatory simulation of
the PSS by playing roles.
3
Co-creation
Description: The users participate
actively to propose their own “PSS
configurations” and customize the
PSS design according to their own
preferences. This can be done by
inviting users, hosting
participatory games or
crowdsourcing.
Purpose: This step allows users to
contribute their ideas by directly
inputting their
desired parameters.
Method: User
submission forms
Purpose: These are forms that
are created especially for
collecting user inputs. The
pre-defined forms helps to
simplify the task for user
submission and, thus, ensure
effective contribution.
Users are asked to fill in a
form with their desired
parameters for the PSS. They
are also asked to give
comments and suggestions
for the existing PSS, which
was previously
demonstrated in the
“Prototype #1” step.
4
Analysis
Description: The company
analyzes user-generated PSS
configurations and identifies the
“favorite” configurations.
Purpose: This step summarizes
user inputs and analyzes how
various alternatives of PSS options
are favored by users. From this
analysis, new PSS concepts
might emerge.
Method: Simple
statistical analysis
Purpose: This method allows
designers to collect and
classify options to
find “patterns”.
Designers collect user input
options and parameters,
cluster them into segments
of closely equivalent values,
count frequencies and figure
out the “favorite”
configurations.
28
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
Table 1. Cont.
Step Tasks Method Implementation of Method
Creation phase
5
Generation
Description: Based on the “favorite
configurations” above, the
company builds new PSS
concepts, i.e.,
“user-generated concepts”.
Purpose: This step makes new PSS
concepts from users’ favorite
options and parameters.
Method: Concept generation
Purpose: This method helps to
generate various concepts or
alternatives by combining
various favorite options
and parameters.
Designers combine various
options and generate several
alternatives that can be
considered as
user-generated concepts.
6
Prototype #2
Description: The company
demonstrates the prototypes of
newly-generated concepts to a
group of users so that they can
evaluate them.
Purpose: This step ensures that the
users (user Group 2) understand
the PSS thoroughly as, well as
experience the PSS themselves, so
that they can give a precise and
proper evaluation.
Method: Storyboard and
participatory game
Purpose: The storyboard
explains briefly the PSS
structure and mechanism, as
well as the elements and
parameters, while the
participatory game actually
allows users to experience the
PSS themselves by playing
roles in the PSS process.
The PSS is introduced to the
users firstly in the form of a
storyboard that explains
what is included and how
the PSS is provided (process,
parameters, etc.). After that,
the users are invited to
participate in the
participatory simulation of
the PSS by playing roles.
Finalization phase
7
Evaluation
Description: The evaluation criteria
are explained to the users, and the
users score to evaluate various
concepts. Based on the evaluation
results, the company can select the
winning (i.e., the best) concept.
Purpose: This step collects the
evaluation of users (user Group 2)
for the newly-designed PSS, as
well as the existing PSS, so that
the performances of alternatives
can be compared quantitatively.
Method: Multi-criteria scoring
Purpose: This method allows
users to evaluate the PSS along
various criteria, and thus, a
comprehensive evaluation can
be achieved to give deeper
insights and a
precise comparison.
A list of criteria is proposed
(Table 5) and a scoring scale
of 1 to 5 is used to score PSS
concepts. Scores are
collected and calculated, and
the results will be used to
compare concepts to identify
the best one.
8
Improvement
Description: The company can
improve the winning concept by
selecting strong aspects of other
concepts and implementing these
aspects in the winning concept to
achieve an “improved concept”.
Purpose: This step helps designers
to exploit the best aspects of each
concept to ensure that there is no
waste of innovation.
Method: Manual improvement
Designers try to find strong
aspects of low scored
concepts and try to
implement those aspects in
the winning concept.
9
End
The company achieves a new PSS
design that is improved compared
to the initial idea or the
previous design.
N/A N/A
Section 4 introduces a case study that is used to explain how the proposed framework can be
used and validated.
29
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
4. Case Study and Validation of the Framework
4.1. Introduction to the Case
In Section 1, we mentioned Mulenserv and its PSS briefly. Mulenserv has a PSS called
“N-Handbook”, which is a book plus additional services for individuals and enterprises to learn
new product development (NPD) at a professional level. The N-Handbook is a complex PSS offering,
as shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Elements of the N-Handbook.
Element Content
Product
‚ A printed book
‚ Optional additions: USB/DVD for lecture video storage,
wooden box for keeping the book and accessories
Service
‚ Lecture videos (YouTube channel)
‚ Offline lectures
‚ Additional documentation (tutorials, case studies, exercises,
etc., on closed discussion boards)
‚ Questions and Answers (QnAs)
‚ Offline seminars, examination and certification, project
guidance, consulting
Process
‚ Online/offline announcement
‚ Customer consulting
‚ Customer purchase + delivery
‚ Customers use
‚ Provide services
‚ Feedback and prepare for next version
Parameters
‚ Forms of support
‚ Number of offline lectures
‚ Length of each offline lecture
‚ Availability of online lectures
‚ Length of project practice
‚ Availability of examination and certification
‚ Recommendation for job seeking
‚ Annual update frequency
‚ Number of offline seminars/best practices
‚ Renewal fee for new release
‚ Price of the package
Network
‚ Existing web systems of Mulenserv, social network, email, etc.,
for delivering services
‚ Offline network for delivering products (shops, post offices)
Stakeholders
‚ The company (designers, staff)
‚ Users
‚ Suppliers (print shops, network providers)
‚ Others
Value proposition
‚ Bringing long-term benefits with flexible costs
‚ Users make the most of the N-Handbook
4.2. Experimental Implementation of the Proposed Framework
In order to demonstrate, as well as to validate the proposed framework, we conduct an experiment
with user participation. In this experiment, a group of users is asked to comment, suggest, give
feedback to the existing design of the N-Handbook and to further ideate their own configuration of
the N-Handbook. Details are as follows:
30
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
Step 0: Start
The company starts with the existing design of the N-Handbook, which is currently offered to
customers. This design is denoted as D0.
Step 1: Representation
The PSS is represented using a simplified representation.
In this experiment, assuming that the process, network, stakeholders and value proposition
elements are fixed, the existing N-Handbook can be described as in Table 3.
Table 3. Details of the existing N-Handbook.
Element Content
Product ‚ A printed book: black and white
Service
‚ Lecture videos: YouTube channel
‚ Offline lectures: Yes
‚ Additional documentation (tutorials, case studies, exercises,
etc., on closed discussion boards): Yes
‚ QnAs: Yes
‚ Offline seminars: Yes
Process
‚ Online/offline announcement
‚ Customer consulting
‚ Customer purchase + delivery
‚ Customers use
‚ Provide services
‚ Feedback and prepare for next version
Parameters
‚ Forms of support (FOS): No
‚ Number of offline lectures (NOL): 12
‚ Length of each offline lecture (LEL): 2 h
‚ Availability of online lectures (AOL): Yes
‚ Length of project practice (LPP): not available (N/A)
‚ Availability of examination and certification (AEE): No
‚ Recommendation for job seeking (RJS): No
‚ Annual update frequency (AUF): 1 per year
‚ Number of offline seminars/best practices (NOS): 1 per year
‚ Renewal fee for new release (RFR): 50% discount (DC)
‚ Price of the package (POP): 210 USD
Network
‚ Existing web systems of Mulenserv, social network, email, etc.,
for delivering services
‚ Offline network for delivering products (shops, post offices)
Stakeholders
‚ The company (designers, staff)
‚ Users
‚ Suppliers (print shops, network providers)
‚ Others
Value
proposition
‚ Bringing long-term benefits with flexible costs
‚ Users make the most of the N-Handbook
Step 2: Prototype
The company communicates about the printed books and shows media about the additional
services and explains the process, network, value proposition, parameters, etc., of the N-Handbook
in detail to a group of 21 participants (Group 1). These participants are selected from the database of
individuals who showed interest in the N-Handbook, including the persons who asked for information
and the persons who actually purchased. This is to ensure that the selected participants are enthusiastic
enough about the future PSS and that we can keep them in the loop of participation.
31
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
Step 3: Co-creation
The participants are asked to give comments and suggestions for improving the existing design.
The participants are also asked to propose their own preferences for the N-Handbook offering,
including product, service and parameters. This is done by direct input to a pre-defined form.
Step 4: Analysis
The feedback (comments, suggestions) from the participants are collected and applied to improve
the design of the existing N-Handbook.
The proposed preferences of the participants are collected and analyzed to find “favorite patterns”
or the favorite PSS configurations. This is done manually by the designers by counting each and every
proposed preference and making detailed statistics.
Step 5: Generation
The designers generate “new PSS designs” in this step. The design that is the result of implementing
participants’ comments and suggestions is called D0X. There are three “favorite patterns” from
participants’ proposed preferences, and thus, the designers produce three more “new PSS designs”,
which are called D1, D2 and D3. The details of D0X, D1, D2 and D3 can be found in Table 4 below.
Table 4. Comparison of various new N-Handbook designs.
Element
Content of N-Handbook Designs
D0X D1 D2 D3
Product Color printed book
Black and
white printed
book
Wooden box
USB
DVD
Color printed book
Wooden box
DVD
Black and white printed
book
DVD
Service
YouTube channel
Offline lecture
Additional documentation
QnAs
Offline seminars
Offline lecture
Additional
documentation
QnAs
Offline
seminars
Offline lecture
Additional
documentation
QnAs
Offline seminars
YouTube channel
Offline lecture
Additional documentation
QnAs
Offline seminars
Process
‚ Online/offline announcement
‚ Customer consulting
‚ Customer purchase + delivery
‚ Customers use
‚ Provide services
‚ Feedback and prepare for next version
Parameters
FOS: No
NOL: 12
LEL: 2 h
AOL: Yes
LPP: 3 months
AEE: Yes
RJS: Yes
AUF: 2 per year
NOS: 2 per year
RFR: 70% DC
POP: 210 USD
FOS: Facebook
NOL: 4
LEL: 2 h
AOL: Yes
LPP: 3 months
AEE: Yes
RJS: Yes
AUF: 1 per year
NOS: 4 per year
RFR: 70% DC
POP: 200 USD
FOS: Multi (*)
NOL: 12
LEL: 2 h
AOL: No
LPP: 3 months
AEE: Yes
RJS: Yes
AUF: 3 per year
NOS: 3 per year
RFR: 70% DC
POP: 230 USD
(*): Facebook, Boards,
email, Mobile apps
FOS: Multi (*)
NOL: 8
LEL: 2 h
AOL: No
LPP: 2 months
AEE: Yes
RJS: Yes
AUF: 3 per year
NOS: 2 per year
RFR: 80% DC
POP: 190 USD
(*): Boards, email
Network
‚ Existing web systems of Mulenserv, social network, email, etc., for delivering services
‚ Offline network for delivering products (shops, post offices)
Stakeholders
‚ The company (designers, staff)
‚ Users
‚ Suppliers (print shops, network providers)
‚ Others
Value proposition
‚ Bringing long term benefits with flexible costs
‚ Users make the most of the N-Handbook
32
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
Step 6: Prototype
The company demonstrates the prototypes of the PSS concepts to a new group of 65 participants
(Group 2) who are selected from the database of individuals who showed interest in the N-Handbook,
including the persons who asked for information and the persons who actually purchased.
Step 7: Evaluation
After explaining the four designs (i.e., D0X, D1, D2 and D3) thoroughly, the participants are asked
to score each design along various criteria on a one to five scale. The scoring criteria are retrieved from
the survey result from both groups of users before their participation. These are the most agreeable
criteria to be used to evaluate the designed PSS among the participants. Details of the scoring criteria
are provided below (Table 5).
Table 5. Scoring criteria.
Criteria Description
Ease of access How easily can the users access, use and leverage the package?
Applicability Is this package applicable to the users’ job?
Affordability Is the price of the offering affordable (considering its content)?
Desirability Do the users want to buy the package?
Necessity Is this package necessary for the users’ job?
Acceptance If the users are offered this package, would they accept the offering?
Various designs are scored along the above criteria, and the results are recorded for further
analysis. The analyzed results are shown in Section 4.3.
Step 8: Improvement
After scoring, the best design is identified, and the designers would try to improve it by trying to
implement the strong aspects of other designs into it.
Step 9: End
The company achieves an improved PSS design with higher quality, user acceptance
and satisfaction.
4.3. Experimental Results
After collecting the scores from participants, we calculate the mean values of scores for all
65 participants, as shown in Table 6.
Table 6. Mean values of scores for various designs along various criteria.
Criteria
Mean Value of Scores for Various Designs
D0X D1 D2 D3
Ease of access 3.21 3.80 3.98 3.72
Applicability 3.18 3.74 3.90 3.97
Affordability 2.74 3.20 2.87 3.75
Desirability 2.70 3.13 3.38 3.44
Necessity 3.28 3.72 3.85 3.75
Acceptance 3.02 3.54 3.98 3.66
Figure 3 shows the data in Table 6 graphically.
33
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
Figure 3. Visualized data showing the scores of various designs along various criteria.
Figure 3 shows that, for all criteria, designs that were suggested by users (i.e., D1, D2 and
D3) perform better than the design that was developed solely by Mulenserv’s designers (i.e., D0X,
represented by the line with square points), especially in terms of “ease of access”, “applicability”
and “acceptance”. This shows the outperformance of user-suggested designs, and thus, it shows the
benefits of user co-creation and the use of the proposed framework.
4.4. Result Analysis and Validation
In order to validate the significance of experimental results to draw conclusions on the advantage
of the proposed framework, the authors perform a t-test on the collected data of D0X and D2.
The dataset for this t-test is collected from scoring results by all participants. This means that we use
the result of the experiment performed at Mulenserv in the case study for this validation. The analysis
results, which are rounded, are shown in Table 7.
Table 7. t-test analysis results.
Value Ease of Access Applicability Affordability Desirability Necessity Acceptance
Pearson correlation coefficients 0.257 0.317 0.403 0.391 0.390 0.0314
t-statistic 4.387 5.068 0.798 4.128 3.879 5.030
P (T ď t) one-tailed 2.191 ˆ 10´5 1.833ˆ 10´6 0.214 5.399 ˆ 10´5 1.250 ˆ 10´4 2.111 ˆ 10´6
P (T ď t) two-tailed 4.382 ˆ 10´5 3.667 ˆ 10´6 0.428 1.080 ˆ 10´4 2.501 ˆ 10´4 4.221 ˆ 10´6
The reason why we choose D2 to compare to D0X is that D2 performs the highest among the three
user-suggested designs in terms of “acceptance”, which is the most important criteria for a PSS.
Table 7 shows that, for almost all criteria, the differences between D2 and D0X are large enough
to confirm the significance of the collected data because of the t-test result, P (T ď t) < 0.05 for both
one-tailed and two-tailed tests. There is only one exception for “affordability”. For this criterion, the
t-test result cannot ensure the real difference between D2 and D0X. Another t-test result shows that, in
terms of “affordability”, D3, which was also suggested by the users, significantly outperforms D0X.
In order to improve D2 to become even better, Mulenserv can consider applying D3’s pricing strategy
to enhance D2’s “affordability”.
Eventually, we can say that the experimental data are significant, the results are validated and
the user-suggested designs perform better than the design that was solely developed by Mulenserv’s
team. This confirms the advantage of the proposed framework.
The key to successful implementation of this framework is user co-creation throughout the process.
Users understand what they need the most and would be ready to accept offerings that are tailored to
34
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
their needs. Two other important factors are the simplification of PSS configurations using elements
and the demonstration of PSS prototypes so that the users can experience and understand the PSS
before co-creation. The proposed framework is structured regarding all of those factors.
There are several issues when adopting the design process of conventional NPD (new product
development) to the PSS context. In NPD, the company designs and develops products according to the
requirements that were retrieved from customer needs and the results of competitive benchmarking.
In some cases, the communication of customer needs to the design team is not done properly, and that
leads to ineffective products. When being applied to PSS design, where user emotion, behavior and
preferences are highly significant, conventional NPD processes may not work properly. These cases of
designing PSS need a new approach, such as our proposed framework. On the other hand, if the design
requires technical skills, such as engineering, drafting, manufacturing, etc., the co-creation task may
become difficult for users to participate in, and the model may not be applied effectively. In summary,
the proposed framework can effectively deal with the designing of user-sensitive components, such as
consumer PSS in a B2C environment (not industrial PSS in a B2B environment).
After proposing the framework and conducting the experiment, we gained more insights and
experience of how users are actually involved in a co-creative design process. To gain the expected
result for implementation, several guidelines can be found below:
‚ Prepare the scenario of implementing the framework in the case, and communicate necessary
activities during the process to all design team members.
‚ Prototypes of PSS are very important. The prototypes help users to fully understand how the
PSS works, allowing them to experience it so that they can generate and evaluate the PSS in a
correct way.
‚ Representing of the PSS is also important. PSS representation needs to be simple, but thorough
enough to cover all possible PSS elements and parameters. This allows users to co-create effectively
in terms of quantity and quality.
‚ Selection of the right participants is essential. Since the participation to co-create in this process is
time consuming and requires plenty of effort, only users who are enthusiastic enough can ensure
effective participation.
4.5. Managerial Implications
As shown by the validation of the experimental data, proper implementation of the proposed
framework can lead to better performance of the PSS. This suggests that the concept of co-creation and
user involvement can be implemented to bring innovation and breakthroughs to PSS development.
The proposed framework can also be used to estimate the response of potential users (buyers) to the
“to be launched” PSS. Companies can customize the proposed framework for their specific PSS design
projects while keeping the basic principles: the right users; simple representation; thorough prototypes;
easy input forms; and comprehensive evaluation.
In the case study of this paper, we use an on-site participatory design for invited users. Other
methods of involving users can also be used, such as crowdsourcing. In this case, we can use a website
where we upload a call for participation, demonstrations of the PSS, guidelines for each and every step,
etc. This is another option for PSS projects. As suggested in the “Tasks” column of each step (Table 1),
companies can choose various tools to perform tasks in the process of the proposed framework.
5. Conclusions
In this work, the authors propose a co-creative framework for redesigning a PSS. For the first
time, a framework for user co-creation in PSS design has been proposed, detailed and evaluated with
experimental implementation.
Our work provides a practical guideline for developers in designing and redesigning PSS.
It enhances the value perception, evaluation and design quality of PSS. The experimental
35
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
implementation with the case study and the analysis of the experimental results shows that the
proposed framework is valid.
The proposed framework can effectively deal with the designing of user-sensitive components,
such as consumer PSS in a B2C environment. In cases that requires a high level of technical skills and
knowledge or cases with complicated service processes, such as industrial PSS (in a B2B environment),
this framework might not work effectively.
Whether PSS can lead to achieving sustainability depends on how the technical design and the
business model are developed to address sustainable development criteria. One limitation of this work
is that, due to its focus, there is a lack of such consideration. Therefore, this work cannot claim the
possibility of achieving sustainability through PSS. In our following work, where the focus is more
appropriate, we would consider this issue as a separate research topic.
Furthermore, for future work, in order to prove the advantages of the proposed framework, a
comparison between its implementation results and those of other existing methods will be carried
out. Furthermore, an architecture of a computer program (or a mobile application) that employs this
framework as the backbone can be developed. This program can assist design teams to design PSS
collaboratively within their own team and with innovative customers.
Acknowledgments: This research was supported by the Basic Research Program through the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (No. 2013R1A1A2013649).
Author Contributions: Tuananh Tran conceived of, designed and performed the experiments; Joon Young Park
proposed and Tuananh Tran performed the analysis of the experimental data. Tuananh Tran wrote the initial
manuscript. Joon Young Park corrected and revised the final writing.
Conflicts of Interest: There is no conflict of interest for this work.
References
1. Weber, C.; Steinbach, M.; Botta, C.; Deubel, T. Modeling of product–Service systems (PSS) based on the PDD
approach. In Proceedings of the International Design Conference, Dubrovnik, Croatia, 18–21 May 2004;
pp. 547–554.
2. Aurich, J.C.; Mannweiler, C.; Schweitzer, E. How to design and offer service successfully. CIRP J. Manuf.
Sci. Technol. 2010, 2, 136–143. [CrossRef]
3. Bettencourt, L.A.; Ulwick, A.W. The customer—Centered innovation map. Harv. Bus. Rev. 2008, 5, 109–114.
4. Sakao, T.; Birkhofer, H.; Panshef, V.; Dorsam, E. An effective and efficient method to design services:
Empirical study for services by an investment machine manufacturer. Int. J. Internet Manuf. Serv. 2009, 2,
95–110. [CrossRef]
5. Beuren, F.H.; Ferreira, M.G.G.; Miguel, P.A.C. Product-service systems: A literature review on integrated
products and services. J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 47, 222–231. [CrossRef]
6. Vasantha, G.V.A.; Roy, R.; Lelah, A.; Brissaud, D. A review of product-service systems design methodologies.
J. Eng. Des. 2012, 23, 635–659. [CrossRef]
7. Goedkoop, M.J.; van Halen, C.J.G.; te Riele, H.R.M.; Rommens, P.J.M. Product Service Systems, Ecological
and Economic Basis. Report to Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment Communications
Directorate, The Hague, The Netherlands. 1999. Available online: http://docplayer.net/334668-Productservice-
systems-ecological-and-economic-basics.html (accessed on 29 April 2016).
8. Mont, O.K. Clarifying the concept of product-service system. J. Clean. Prod. 2002, 10, 237–245. [CrossRef]
9. Lim, C.H.; Kim, K.J.; Hong, Y.S.; Park, K.T. PSS Board: A structured tool for product-service system process
visualization. J. Clean. Prod. 2012, 37, 42–55. [CrossRef]
10. Hussain, R.; Lockett, H.; Vasantha, G.V.A. A framework to inform PSS conceptual design by using
system–in–use data. Comput. Ind. 2012, 63, 319–327. [CrossRef]
11. Baines, T.S.; Lightfoot, H.; Steve, E.; Neely, A.; Greenough, R.; Peppard, J.; Roy, R.; Shehab, E.; Braganza, A.;
Tiwari, A.; et al. State-of-the-art in product service systems. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part B 2007, 221, 1543–1552.
[CrossRef]
12. Morelli, N. The design of product/service systems from a designer’s perspective. Common Ground (Lond.)
2002, 18, 3–17.
36
Sustainability 2016, 8, 434
13. Tukker, A. Eight types of product-service system: Eight ways to sustainability? Experiences from SusProNet.
Bus. Strategy Environ 2004, 13, 246–260. [CrossRef]
14. Vezzoli, C.; Ceschin, F.; Diehl, J.C.; Kohtala, C. New design challenges to widely implement ‘Sustainable
Product–Service Systems’. J. Clean. Prod. 2015, 97, 1–12. [CrossRef]
15. Qu, M.; Yu, S.; Chen, D.; Chu, J.; Tian, B. State-of-the-art of design, evaluation, and operation methodologies
in product service systems. Comput. Ind. 2016, 77, 1–14. [CrossRef]
16. Luiten, H.; Knot, M.; van der Host, T. Sustainable product service systems: The kathalys method.
In Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on Environmentally Conscious Design and Inverse
Manufacturing, Tokyo, Japan, 11–15 December 2001; pp. 190–197.
17. Manzini, E.; Vezolli, C. A strategic design approach to develop sustainable product service systems: Examples
taken from the “environmental friendly innovation” Italian prize. J. Clean. Prod. 2003, 11, 851–857. [CrossRef]
18. Pezzotta, G.; Pirola, F.; Pinto, R.; Akasaka, F.; Shimomura, Y. A Service Engineering framework to design
and assess an integrated product-service. Mechatronics 2015, 31, 169–179. [CrossRef]
19. Morelli, N. Developing new product service systems (PSS): Methodologies and operational tools.
J. Clean. Prod. 2006, 14, 1495–1501. [CrossRef]
20. Kowalkowski, C.; Kindström, D. Value visualization strategies for PSS Development. In Introduction to
Product/Service-System Design; Sakao, T., Lindahl, M., Eds.; Springer: London, UK, 2009; pp. 159–182.
21. Sakao, T.; Shimomura, Y. Service Engineering: A Novel Engineering Discipline for Producers to Increase
Value Combining Service and Product. J. Clean. Prod. 2007, 15, 590–604. [CrossRef]
22. Kim, Y.S.; Wang, E.; Lee, S.W.; Choi, Y.C. A Product-Service System Representation and Its Application
in a Concept Design Scenario. In Proceedings of the 1st CIRP Industrial Product Service Systems (IPS2)
Conference, Cranfield University, England, UK, 1–2 April 2009; pp. 32–39.
23. Maussang, N.; Zwolinski, P.; Brissaud, D. Product-service system design methodology: From the PSS
architecture design to the products specifications. J. Eng. Des. 2009, 20, 349–366. [CrossRef]
24. Tan, A.R.; Matzen, D.; McAloone, T.; Evans, S. Strategies for Designing and Developing Services for
Manufacturing Firms. CIRP J. Manuf. Sci. Technol. 2010, 3, 90–97. [CrossRef]
25. Bertoni, A.; Bertoni, M.; Isaksson, O. Communicating the Value of PSS Design Alternatives using
Color-Coded CAD Models. In Proceedings of the 3rd CIRP International Conference on Industrial Product
Service Systems, Braunschweig, Germany, 5–6 May 2011.
26. Steen, M.; Manschot, M.; De Koning, N. Benefits of co-design in service design projects. Int. J. Des. 2011, 5,
53–60.
27. Shih, L.H.; Hu, A.H.; Lin, S.L.; Chen, J.L.; Tu, J.C. ; Kuo T.C. An Integrated Approach for Product Service
System Development: II. Evaluation Phase. J. Environ. Eng. Manag. 2009, 19, 343–356.
28. Yoon, B.; Kim, S.; Rhee, J. An evaluation method for designing a new product-service system.
Expert Syst. Appl. 2012, 39, 3100–3108. [CrossRef]
29. Exner, K.; Lindow, K.; Buchholz, C.; Stark, R. Validation of Product-Service Systems-A Prototyping Approach.
Procedia CIRP 2014, 16, 68–73. [CrossRef]
30. Komoto, H.; Tomiyama, T. Design of Competitive Maintenance Service for Durable and Capital Goods using
Life Cycle Simulation. Int. J. Autom. Technol. 2009, 3, 63–70.
31. Dorst, K. The core of ‘design thinking’ and its application. Des. Stud. 2011, 32, 521–532. [CrossRef]
32. Kleemann, F. Un(der)paid Innovators: The Commercial Utilization of Consumer Work through
Crowdsourcing Science. Technol. Innov. Stud. 2008, 4, 5–26.
33. Tran, T.; Park, J.Y. Crowd Participation Pattern in the Phases of a Product Development Process that Utilizes
Crowdsourcing. Ind. Eng. Manag. Syst. 2012, 11, 266–275. [CrossRef]
© 2016 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
37
sustainability
Article
Research on Business Models in their Life Cycle
Adam Jabło ´ nski * and Marek Jabło ´ nski *
Department of Management, University of Da˛browa Górnicza (Wyz˙ sza Szkoła Biznesu w Da˛browie Górniczej),
Zygmunta Cieplaka Str. 1c, 41-300 Da˛browa Górnicza, Poland
* Correspondence: adam.jablonski@ottima-plus.com.pl (A.J.); marek.jablonski@ottima-plus.com.pl (M.J.);
Tel.: +48-60-6364-500 (A.J.); +48-60-4538-566 (M.J.)
Academic Editor: Marc A. Rosen
Received: 18 January 2016; Accepted: 27 April 2016; Published: 30 April 2016
Abstract: The paper presents the results of theoretical discussions and research findings in the field
of designing sustainable business models that support the creation of value at various stages of the
business life cycle. The paper presents selected findings of extensive research into the business models
of Polish companies listed on the Warsaw Stock Exchange. Companies which are at various stages of
development should build and adapt their business models in order to maintain the ability to create
value for stakeholders. Characteristics of business models at the early stages of development are
different than at mature stages. The paper highlights the differences in business models in the context
of the life cycle of companies and sustainability criteria. The paper presents research findings which
show that the company’s development can be seen from the point of view of the business model.
Research on business models concentrated on identifying the key attributes and the configuration
of the business models appropriate for the early stage of development as well as the maturity stage.
It was found that the business models of companies at an early stage of the development of companies
listed on theWarsaw Stock Exchange are oriented primarily to how the company shapes, delivers,
and captures value from the market in order to generate profits for shareholders and increase the
value of the company, while the business models of mature companies include the intentions of
management used to balance objectives with respect to different groups of stakeholders, and to
carefully formulate and implement business objectives with particular attention paid to preserving
the sustainability of the business. The assessment of business models from the point of view of the life
cycle proves that managers change their approach to configuring business models over time; at some
point, they include management intentions aimed at a broader range of goals than merely generating
profits. At the early stage, it is important to adapt the business model to the ability to create value
for shareholders by actively searching for the optimal configuration of the business model. Here a
component approach to making rapid changes in the structure of the business model is essential.
The business model of mature companies is based on assumptions ensuring the long-term viability of
the business and is holistic in nature. When the company moves from the stage of early development
to the maturity stage, business models change in such a way that the assumptions of the Triple Bottom
Line concept become increasingly important, as expressed in the joint implementation of Corporate
Social Responsibility and Value-Based Management assumptions. At the early stage of development,
the business model strengthens the need to create value for shareholders and is not as dependent on
strong partnerships with a large number of stakeholders. At the maturity stage, it is important to
balance the objectives of all stakeholders and to build long-term relationships with them. As regards
relationships with the environment, business models at these two stages are different. The paper
presents research on the business models of companies at their early stage of development as well as
mature companies, taking into consideration the assumptions of the Sustainable Business Model.
Keywords: business model; company value; capital market; balance; a sustainable business model; life
cycle of a business model; early stage of company development; maturity stage of company development
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430; doi:10.3390/su8050430 38 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
1. Introduction
Conducting business in the conditions of the economic crisis has given rise to a new perspective
on the decision-making processes taking place in companies. Companies' ability to manage business
continuity, including their abilities related to strategic revival or restructuring, is acquiring special
significance which should contribute to ensuring the continued creation of company value. This is
important in that the management mechanisms of the capital market are significantly influenced by
changes in the macro-environment occurring at the same time, forces of sectoral determinants and
internal decision-making processes in companies. One of the key strategic factors affecting these
processes is to have the appropriate competencies related to company life cycle management using
efficient business models. These models, which define and take advantage of the company’s potential
to compete, shape the image of the company in the market and are a source of competitive advantage
which the company has and renews cyclically. It should be noted that, as [1] (p. 174) writes, a business
model concept is based on economic sciences and paradigms related to conducting business. This insight
allows a researcher to expand the scope of research into issues related to the active conduct of modern
business. The authors hypothesize that the achievement of success by a company and its ability to
build company value over a long period of time depends on having an efficient business model in
each period of business activity using sustainability criteria. This model should be appropriate for the
present market conditions and should allow the company to adjust to ever-changing needs by managing
its configuration in such a way that the interfaces between its components provide a platform for the
dynamic development and growth of the company at each stage of its operation.
The purpose of the paper is to present the research findings and discussions in the field of
designing business models that contribute to the creation of value at various stages of the business life
cycle, and indicates that a business model at the maturity stage of development has the characteristics
of sustainability. The paper presents selected theoretical aspects and the findings of extensive research
into the business models of companies listed on the Warsaw Stock Exchange, as published in works by
M. Jabło ´ nski [2] and A. Jabło ´ nski [3]. The studies described in these publications have been selectively
chosen for the purpose of this paper, as well as combined and interpreted in such a way as to cover
all the stages of a company’s life cycle. The same applies to studies and analyses and how they
take into account the business models of both companies at the early stage of development and
mature companies. Based on the data, the paper presents reflections on and analyses of business
models in the life cycle in the context of business model development which fulfills the objectives
of the sustainability concept. The managers of companies at the early stage of development focus
their attention on designing, delivering scalability and dynamically adjusting the business model
used. Conversely, in mature companies they significantly expand the understanding of the business
model, adding management intentions to its attributes, based on balancing the interests of different
groups of stakeholders and the coherent and coordinated use of assumptions of the Value-Based
Management and Corporate Social Responsibility concepts, leading to the creation of the Sustainable
Business Model. Business models examined by means of the criterion of the life cycle change due
to the growing needs of stakeholders over time. As these needs and expectations are the greatest in
the case of mature companies, it is therefore justifiable to create a category of a business model based
on sustainability. The methodological objectives of the paper are based on the theory of a systems
approach by L. von Bertalanffy [4], K.E. Boulding [5], R.L. Ackoff [6] and the approach of Resource
Based View, Rumelt [7], E. T. Penrose [8], J. Barney [9–11], R. Amit, P., M. A. Peteraf [12], B. Wernerfelt
1984 [13], M. J. Dollinger [14], C. K. Prahalad and G. Hamel [15] (p. 81). The systems approach and
resource-based view are suitable for the assessment of business models and company management in
terms of the life cycle, as they take into account the pooling of resources in a relatively firm and unified
whole. The business model is a system consisting of the fitting configuration of resources appropriate
for a given situation.
This paper is structured as follows. After discussing the sustainability concept as a new way
of understanding business sustainability (Section 2), business models are discussed in terms of the
39
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
life cycle (Section 3). The literature on issues related to the life cycle and its reference to the concept
of business models has been reviewed. Section 4 deals with the design of business models at the
early stage of development, while Section 5 presents the design of business models at the maturity
stage of development. These approaches to designing business models are slightly different as are the
assumptions on which they are based. The research methodology is presented in Section 6, as well
as the scope of research, research subjects, and hypotheses for both companies at the early stage
of development and mature companies. The research findings are presented in Sections 7 and 8.
The discussion is presented in Section 9. The conclusion in Section 10 summarizes the core findings of
the paper and the core results of the analysis.
2. A Sustainable Business Model as a New Way of Ensuring Business Sustainability
The core premise underlying the concept of sustainability is related to the philosophy of the
Triple Bottom Line [16] which increases the chances of survival in various conditions. Business model
sustainability is now one of the key determinants of doing business. T. Dyllick and K. Muff define
the evolution of sustainability according to three levels of Business Sustainability, the development of
which is presented in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Business Sustainability: Typology with key characteristics and changes [17].
Figure 1 shows the evolution of the business sustainability concept, assuming that the formula
of “Business Sustainability 3.0” is currently being developed, where the idea is action based on value
creation by supplying goods and the organization’s openness to the external environment. Different
models, approaches and concepts presented in the literature make the concept of sustainability
ambiguous and difficult to interpret. On the one hand, it mentions ensuring business sustainability,
and on the other hand, a multidimensional look at the organization considering the interests of various
groups of stakeholders. W. Stubbs and C. Cocklin express the view that, in relation to sustainable
enterprise, the company should aim to generate income. Profits are used to pursue sustainable goals,
as well as the mission and vision based on achieving social and economic objectives and financial
performance [18].
S. Schaltegger and R. Burritt highlight the ambiguous impact of social and environmental attitudes
on a company’s financial performance, giving examples in which such attitudes have no effect on the
economic success of the company [19].
40
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
T. Dyllick and K. Hockerts present a model based on the concept of corporate sustainability
(balancing and integrating the company’s activities) mapped in the form of a triangle. In the three
corners of the triangle the focus is, respectively, on the business case, natural case and societal case [20].
W. McDonough and M. Braungart present the model of corporate sustainability in the form of a fractal
triangle with ecology-ecology, equity-equity and economy-economy in its corners [21].
F. Boons and F. Lüdeke-Freund focus on linking the sustainability concept with innovation.
In their opinion, the sustained success of an organization depends on innovation. Rules determining
the functioning of a sustainable business model should be based on creating technological innovation
that can create new markets after being commercialized [22].
The relationship between the concept of CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility) and financial
management is highlighted by Archie B. Carroll and Kareem M. Shabana, who believe that
generally, based on the review of practical business examples, CSR has a positive effect on company
performance [23].
S. Schaltegger and R. Burritt show that applying the principles of corporate social responsibility
and sustainability management uses the same assumptions, based on the integration of social, economic
and environmental aspects [24].
Frank Boons, Carlos Montalvo, Jaco Quist, Marcus Wagner believe that sustainable business
models should be supported by government agencies through appropriate policies. Companies
and government should work together to create innovations implemented in sustainable business
models [25].
A business case for sustainability according to S. Schaltegger, F. Lüdeke-Freund and E.G. Hansen
is the interpretation which indicates that the key aspect differentiating classic business solutions
between cases based on sustainability is a primary objective and incorporating smart solutions based
on environmental and social factors affecting the economic success of the company into the business
model [26]. J.G. York defines three conditions that guide the investors when they invest in sustainable
business, namely the required increase in ROIC (Return on Invested Capital), the minimum value of the
WACC (Weighted Average Cost of Capital) and an increase in the availability of capital. This approach
is cost-effective and usable for startups [27].
S. Schaltegger, E. Hansen, and F. Lüdeke-Freund define a business model for sustainability as
one which helps in describing, analyzing, managing, and communicating (i) a company’s sustainable
value proposition to its customers, and all other stakeholders; (ii) how it creates and delivers this
value; (iii) and how it captures economic value while maintaining or regenerating natural, social, and
economic capital beyond its organizational boundaries [28].
Nikolay Dentchev, Rupert Baumgartner, Hans Dieleman, Lara Johannsdottir, Jan Jonker,
Timo Nyberg, Romana Rauter, Michele Rosano, Yulia Snihur, Xingfu Tang, and Bart van Hoof solicit
inputs on the variety of organizational settings which support the implementation of sustainable
business models.
– Do organizational and legal structures matter for the development of sustainable business models?
If so, how does that help or hinder utilization of the new models?
– What are the drivers for profit-dominated organizations to engage in implementing sustainable
business models?
– How does intrapreneurship impact the implementation of sustainable business models
in multinationals?
– What is the role of the service sector in implementing sustainable business models, in addition to
manufacturing or other types of industries?
– Are there conflicts of co-existence among multinational companies which are using sustainable
and conventional business models?
– What are the dynamics of sustainable business model implementation in non-profit organizations
and government-controlled organizations [29]?
41
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
N.M.P. Bocken, S.W. Short, P. Rana, and S. Evans believe that business model innovations for
sustainability stand out from other concepts due to the fact that innovations based on reducing the
adverse effects on the environment make it possible to effectively capture value from the market and
increase the economic value of the company. At the same time, the product offer also changes [30].
Each approach indicates how interdisciplinary a sustainable business model concept is and how
many interpretations it has. It is interesting to examine a sustainable business model from the point of
view of the life cycle.
3. The Life Cycle of Business Models
The relevant literature proposes various definitions of business models. This concept is interpreted
from different points of view. For example, according to R. Amit and C. Zott, “A business model
describes the structure of transaction governance designed in such a way that value is created and all
business opportunities are taken advantage of” [31] (p. 511).
The definition by R. Casadesus-Masanell and J.E. Ricart is based on identifying business logic in
the context of creating value for stakeholders [32] (p. 196).
As far as preserving the continuity of the business in the long term is concerned, the definition
of the business model was presented by B. Demil and X. Lecocq, who say that “a business model
defines how the organization operates to ensure its stability” [33] (p. 231). An interesting definition
has been presented by B. Mahadevan, who says that a business model is the unique configuration
of three streams, namely a stream associated with customer service and cooperation with partners,
a revenue stream, and a logistical stream [34] (p. 59).
D.J. Teece bases his definition on converting payments into profits [1] (p. 173).
An approach to business models based on the concept of innovation is presented by
H. Chesbrough, who claims, based on joint works with R. Rosenbloom, that it is crucial for a business
model to rely on assumptions resulting from presenting a value proposition, identifying market
segments, designing the structure of the value chain, looking at the means of generating revenue,
evaluating the cost structure, as well as describing the company’s position in the value network.
All this must be supported by an adequate competitive strategy [35] (p. 355).
E. Fielt highlights the description of business operation logic in terms of capturing value from the
market [36] (pp. 91–92).
There are many definitions and approaches to business models and there is still no consensus
on a universal definition. They are examined in terms of the essence of their definition, the use
and the configuration of components. The proposed definition of the business model concept is
interdisciplinary in its nature. They prove the broad extent to which the definitions of business models
are examined in relation to many areas and perspectives. Some authors focus their attention on the
strategic character of delivering value to a customer, others on the results such as profit, and still others
on social aspects. The definitions presented emphasize other factors that distinguish them from one
another. Undoubtedly, however, all of them focus on the logic of doing business, and thus on the
assumptions on which the company has based its business. The distinct characteristics of various
approaches to the issue discussed result from showing other features which can ensure the company’s
success. Life cycle is an important issue in terms of examining business models.
The issue of a company’s life cycle is generally widely recognized in the literature. Authors who
have contributed to the development of this issue include Chandler (1962) [37], Patton (1959) [38],
Levitt (1965) [39], Cox (1967) [40], Churchill and Lewis (1983), Greiner (1972) [41,42], Hofer (1975) [43],
Scott and Bruce (1987) [44], Quinn and Cameron (1983) [45], and Parnell and Carraher (2003) [46].
According to Levitt (1965) and Cox (1967), different strategies are adopted at different stages of the
product life cycle. Thietart and Vivas (1984) [47] argue that strategies depend not only on the stage of
the life cycle, but are affected by the company’s strategic logic. In addition, the success of the strategy
seems to be dependent on the sector and characteristics of the external environment.
42
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
In terms of the examination of the life cycle of companies in the context of the organization, from
the point of view of business models, a cognitive gap can be observed in this area. To date, the issue
of the life cycle of companies in terms of business model attributes and increasing the value of the
company has not been widely discussed. The business model as an ontological being may also be
examined from the point of view of the life cycle.
The authors highlight the research gap in existing studies, e.g., on strategic factors and
interrelations, and derive their research questions. There is a significant research gap in management
sciences in the scope of business models in the context of the life cycle, particularly in relation to the
companies listed on the stock exchange applying the principles of sustainability.
As regards research into the life cycle of business models, D.R.A. Schallmo and L. Brecht show the
relationship between the length of the life cycle and the application of corporate social responsibility
principles, which, in a sense, is linked with the concept of sustainability. The authors suggest that the
application of corporate social responsibility principles contributes to business model sustainability.
These principles lengthen the life cycle of the business model [48].
Further research was done by M. de Reuver, H. Bouwman and I. MacInnes, who examined
which types of external factors are most important from the point of view of the business model life
cycle. They argue that, on the basis of 45 case studies from various sectors of the economy, the most
important drivers of business model dynamics are technological factors. This is particularly important
in the case of startups, where technological attributes should be supported by market needs, while for
large companies this relationship is less important. External factors must be taken into account when
designing the business model in various stages of development but also when modifying it [49].
As far as the business model at an early stage of development is concerned, some characteristics
can be observed. A business model at an early stage of its development is shaped in the context of
applying the effective configuration of components that constitute it, and which are conducive to the
creation of value. A business model should be supported by the attributes related to the quality of
the management team. This is particularly important as regards the quality of the management of
companies at an early stage of their development. B. M. Martins Rodríguez [50] (p. 129) identifies a
need to separate two key areas, namely the business model and the characteristics related to the top
management team. A startup can succeed only if managers have high competencies and operational
capabilities in terms of creating value.
A business model goes through the distinct stages of the idea, development and commercialization.
Its shape is different from what it will be in the future, when, in order to maintain continuity of business,
a company will need to use different methods and management concepts appropriate to the level
of organizational development. The companies that are at an early stage of development and their
business models should be geared to survival. However, the planning horizon in these companies is
shorter due to a number of uncertainties. Young companies focus mainly on finding a viable, scalable
and effective business model, which will allow the company to capture market value. Changes in such
models as regards the company’s configuration can happen very quickly—companies modify their
business models throughout the life cycle. Survival is a goal for both young and mature companies, at
which point stakeholders will play a greater role, expecting the distribution of the value produced.
The final form of the business model will be based on balancing various areas of activity in the form
of constructive comparison, which may be referred to as a sustainable business model. The concept
of sustainability is understood as durability; sustainability is a relatively new concept not yet fully
explored. W. M. Grudzewski, I.K. Hejduk, A. Sankowska, and M. Wa ´ntuchowicz define sustainability
as the company’s ability to continuously learn, adapt and develop, revitalize, reconstruct and reorient
to maintain a lasting and distinctive position in the market by offering buyers above-average value
today and in the future (consistent with the paradigm of innovative growth) through organic variation
constituting business models, and arising from the creation of new opportunities, objectives and
responses to them, while balancing the interests of different groups [51] (p. 27). C. Kidd believes that
the concept of sustainability derives from a broader look at this issue, in relation to balancing the
43
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
influence of various political, social and scientific groups in time [52]. This means that there is a close
correlation between the stability of the business and sustainable stakeholder relationship management.
G. Svenson, G. Wood, and M. Callaghan also argue that a fundamental aspect of sustainability occurs
when company expectations and ideas of the market and society affect the prevailing opinions of what
can and cannot be done in sustainable business practice. In turn, stakeholders and their expectations
help to answer this question [53] (p. 338). Relationships with stakeholders determine the shape and
nature of the principles of sustainability in business. An interesting sustainable business model based
on an original SMART concept (sustainability modeling and reporting system) has been developed by
M. Daud Ahmed and D. Sundaram [54] (pp. 611–624). In this model, they defined the sustainability
roadmap (sustainable business transformation roadmap) in which the key elements consist of design,
transformation, monitoring and control, discovery, science and strategy. M. Yunus, B. Moingeon, and
L. Lehmann-Ortega define the concept of a social business model, which can also be a sustainable
business model, and have developed the foundations of building a social business model consisting
of two areas also common to innovative models and areas specific to social models. They show
similarities with conventional and innovative business models which include:
– the challenges of conventional knowledge and basic assumptions,
– the discovery of complementary business partners,
– undertakings in improving process experiments.
As regards the specific assumptions relevant to social business models, they show features such as:
– Encouraging social orientation in terms of profit for shareholders,
– Clear, specific objectives for profit for society.
The approaches presented show the essence of the sustainability concept and direct its attention
to the continuous ability of the company to remain in the market when the condition of this goal is to
have an effective business model at every stage of the life cycle. It should be largely oriented to social
objectives without losing the features of a company focused on generating profit. The time taken from
the stage of business model development to the achievement of a state characterized by features of a
sustainable business model will depend on the particular character of the company, the sector which it
operates in, and market volatility. Based on observations of the phenomena occurring in the economy,
it can be said that this time grows ever shorter. The ability to understand the cycle designed in such a
way allows managers to quickly detect weaknesses in the business model and adjust its configuration
to ensure the constant ability to create value, at the beginning mostly only for shareholders, and later
also for other stakeholders by adapting it to the expected value. It is possible that, at the initial stage of
company development, a business model that has the features of a sustainable business model is built.
However, it rarely happens in a free market economy. In its initial stage of development, the company
focuses primarily on investing and multiplying profits for further expansion and development. At a
later stage of development, the company can share what was gained in previous years. Figure 2 shows
the change in the business model in the life cycle of the company. A business model at an early stage
of development will be characterized by features other than a business model in its maturity stage of
development. To ensure their usefulness and verify their effectiveness, different management methods
and techniques will be used.
44
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
Figure 2. Change in the business model in the company life cycle [55].
Analyzing the approaches to and definitions of business models described in the literature,
the authors adopt the approach by Ch. Zott and R. Amit in their reflections on further research.
Their proposal is based on the fact that a business model is a package of specific actions performed
in order to meet the needs of the market, in particular involving partnerships centered on the focal
company and its partners [56]. The proposed approach requires a focus on how the business is
conducted, on how value is created for all business participants and on identifying partners that can
assist in performing actions important from the point of view of the business model. It is a holistic
approach [57]. After analyzing the literature, the definition of a sustainable business model in the
life cycle has been presented. A business model evolves during the life cycle of the company. In the
authors’ opinion, a sustainable business model in the life cycle is a business model that is capable of
evolution throughout the life cycle, assuming an incremental increase in the value of the company
when the principles of Corporate Social Responsibility and Value-Based Management are adhered to.
4. The Design of Business Models at the Early Stage of Development
Companies are increasingly competing not only on products and/or services, their quality or
price, but on business models as well. A company with a profitable business model achieves higher
market capitalization, is attractive to investors and stakeholders, and consequently has more market
opportunities. Company value depends on the attractiveness of its business model and the skills
to introduce dynamic changes therein, resulting from the needs of the environment. The proposed
approach to the design of strategies and business models aimed at creating value is related to the
configuration of the business model. This means a set of business model components that shape
its whole, characterizing the essence of this model. The word “configuration” is used as business
models can be altered by modifying their components, and even in some cases totally reconfigured.
In this approach, the ontological essence is not so much the business model as this configuration.
Dynamics of a business model means its ability to change, which leads to a higher company value
than before the change, by using a different configuration of business model components. Issues
pertaining to the level of technology, processes and strategies should be included in a measuring
system used to monitor the process of creating value. Designing business models requires the ability
45
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
to respond to any signals forecasting changes in the external and internal environment of the company;
managers not taking them into consideration in the decision-making process can lead to economic
losses. The business model constantly reacts to corporate strategy. The concept of strategy geometry
developed by R.W. Keidal fulfills these expectations, making a clear distinction between elements of
the complexity of formulating strategies in the context of the factors that influence them [58] (p. 6).
Changing the business model can be natural (resulting from the company’s flexibility in adapting to
changes in its environment—a company changes when the business environment changes) or forced.
Forced changes are often restructuring in their nature [59] (p. 36). This approach to management
processes requires the implementation of a results-oriented organizational culture. Therefore, in the
process of modifying business models quickly, it is essential to implement the concept of Strategic
Performance Management. The assumptions of the concept have been presented by A. de Waal, who
says that this is a process that requires company managers to regularly verify the mission, strategy and
goals. As a result, these goals are measurable using key success factors and performance indicators to
maintain the determined direction of the company’s operations [60] (p. 19).
A dynamic aspect of business models exposes processes and value chains, but it also significantly
affects the shape of organizational structures. The proposed approach should serve to quickly move
from one model to another using a different business model configuration. One of the assumptions is
considering business models from the perspective of seeking an effective configuration of the company
strategic structure to identify such components of the business model that are crucial in the process of
the creation of company value. Treating the concepts of business models, especially in the area of their
configuration, jointly with the concept of value creation appears to be an important subject today, but
one which is not fully recognized as yet, especially in the area of companies classified as innovative.
5. Design of Business Models at the Maturity Stage of Development
The dynamically changing global economy in the era of the intensive development of globalization
creates new needs, both in theoretical management models as well as in practical discussions related
to the perception of business. This is particularly important in the current economic and moral crisis,
the effects of which are visible in most developed countries. It is important to find and/or use the
existing management paradigms, the examination and codification of which will provide a platform
for the development and growth of companies. By observing and analyzing business trends and the
behavior of companies for the past few years, it can be concluded that many business orientations
and concepts, whose roots and method of evaluation are often radically different, lead to similar
business results. This has happened to the concepts of Value-Based Management, Corporate Social
Responsibility, Shareholders, Stakeholders as well as Sustainable Business, and was significantly
influenced by the globalized nature of world economies, which resulted in the creation of values on
the basis of which corporate business models were built. The strategic behavior of companies and
their intercultural exchange led to the creation of new sources and platforms for building competitive
advantage, and consequently a stable source for building long-term value. The principles of sustainable
development are increasingly appreciated, including in the United States. Transferred to the micro
level in terms of the competitiveness of the company, its strategy and by following the principles of
corporate social responsibility amid the global economic crisis, they resulted in the creation of a new
management concept, namely Sustainability. This can be regarded as Sustainable Development aiming
to simultaneously adhere to the principles of ethics, ecology and economy, and may also be understood
as the ability of the company to manage quickly and flexibly, focusing on objectives and enabling
the implementation of the company mission and vision, taking into account the establishment of
competitive advantage on the market. This can be achieved by creating new products and/or services
and implementing modern management methods and concepts, the source of which is scientific
research and solutions to business practices. Sustainable business is business conducted when concepts
of value-based management and corporate social responsibility are used in a systemic way, providing
value for company stakeholders.
46
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
Sustainable business at all levels of management, which includes all of the factors and functions
therein, ensures business continuity as well as the power to create value in the long term, and
enables a sustainable dividend payout to shareholders and the generation of a social dividend to
other stakeholders of the company. The combination of these factors and functions will result in the
search for the most optimal business solutions. This can be done through the mutual, constructive
comparison of resources and factors influencing the ability to increase company value. Therefore, the
most important factor is to find such a balance that will ensure business continuity in the market, while
achieving business results which guarantee the long-term value of the company. The balance ensuring
the implementation of the sustainable business concept may result from building a sustainable business
model connected with the principles of VBM (Value Based Management), CSR and the concepts of
Stakeholders, Shareholders and Sustainable Business. This may lead to the continuity of the business
in the volatile conditions of the market environment.
Therefore, considering the theoretical and practical dimensions of the above issues, it is important
to answer the question, which as yet has not been fully answered in the literature: Which strategic
factors and their interrelations in the adopted business models have the greatest impact on the
long-term building of a socially responsible company? What should the design of such a business
model be?
A premise which says that the subject is important, difficult and requires extended research and
scientific discussions is that companies want to build long-term value, to operate successfully in the
market, to ensure the continuity of the business, to renew (reconstruct, adapt) their business models,
and finally to win. However, they are constantly looking for the optimal ways and mechanisms
allowing them to do it effectively and efficiently. At the same time, signals from the market, economic
impulses, the economic crisis, chaos in the market, public disappointment with the place and role of
companies in the economy, and examples of business collapses all hinder the selection of the most
appropriate way to manage companies.
Moving away from certain management concepts, changes in values, the occurrence of the rapid
flow of not only capital but also information and knowledge and access thereto, changes in perceiving
the nature of the business, and its place in the global ecosystem also resulted in a new dimension in
using the strength of management sciences in global business.
According to the authors, new dimensions of business are responsible management, sustainable
management, socially acceptable management and efficient and effective management. Such an effect
can be obtained by applying sustainability principles in a socially responsible manner.
A socially responsible company is a company whose business model, in increasing its value, is
built on the basis of strategic factors associated with corporate social responsibility and the principles
of value-based management, while determining wise organizational behavior in the company, and
wise market behavior towards company stakeholders, which are based on the principles of integrity,
ethics and professionalism.
Strategic factors related to corporate social responsibility and value-based management are
the factors associated with the functioning and behavior of the organization towards the external
and internal environment, where an appropriate combination leads to sustainable value in terms of
long-term operation on the market.
As a consequence of this approach, a holistic sustainable business model is created, reduced
in its nature, becoming a platform for creating long-term, sustainable value for a socially
responsible company.
A company that is responsible, to a limited extent, is a company that applies the principles
of corporate social responsibility only sometimes, when it is clearly profitable. It adheres to these
principles not on a voluntary basis, according to the organizational culture of the company, but in a
forced way.
A socially irresponsible company is a company that—in its business activities—does not obey the
principles of corporate social responsibility by, inter alia, failing to abide by applicable legal and other
47
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
conditions, by organizational behaviors indicating discrimination, bullying, intimidation, and other
pathological behavior towards staff and other company stakeholders (including suppliers, co-operators
and others) and by treating the company and company personnel only as a tool for making profit.
In view of the above discussions, it can be assumed that the main components of a sustainable business
model built in the subject-object system are strategic factors related to:
1. A combined implementation of the concepts of corporate social responsibility and
value-based management.
2. Balancing the potential of the company.
3. Combining the stakeholder concept and the shareholder concept, which are also strongly related
to the concepts of corporate social responsibility (stakeholders) and value-based management
(shareholders).
4. A sustainable dividend policy.
A holistic model of sustainable business creating company value in the long term can be built on
the basis of the following driving forces that give it the proper dynamics.
1. Strength of conscious application of corporate social responsibility principles.
2. Strength of economic sustainability of the company.
3. Strength of conscious application of corporate governance principles.
4. Strength of stakeholder value and the dynamics of their migration processes.
5. Strength of the consensual relationship: company’s board, shareholders, stakeholders.
6. Strength of implementing a sustainable strategy based on the principles of a balanced scorecard.
7. Strength of balancing intellectual capital of the company.
8. Strength of balancing fixed assets of the company.
9. Strength of balancing internal processes of the company.
10. Strength of the management style based on the logic of conscious decision-making [3] (p. 249).
6. Methodology of Research
As a research instrument, one basic method has been used, i.e., analysis of the literature concerning
the life cycle of business models from startup to mature company. The authors present the problem of
creating the framework of business models in their life cycle. The level of sustainability depends on the
stage of company development. For this purpose, the authors have used literature research, a sustained
approach to shaping the attributes of business models, the features of companies at an early stage of
development and mature companies, as well as the principles for building a sustainable business model
at different stages of company development. The authors have adopted an interpretative approach
as the methodology of scientific research, based on the literature and a systematic retrospective
assessment of the business models of companies in the course of conducting their own business activity
and during their consulting practice. As regards the companies at the early stage of development,
the issue of which business model components are responsible for increasing shareholder value
to the greatest extent is also important. They should, therefore, be a driver of adjusting business
models, and changes aimed at building company value should focus on them. The scope of the
issue presented in the paper represents an attempt to link the findings of the research in the context
of the business life cycle criterion, namely at an early stage of company development, and at the
maturity stage. Therefore, if we add the two scopes of research, quantitative research was conducted
on a sample of 220 companies listed on the Polish Stock Exchange in Warsaw (48 New Connect
companies, 44 Index WIG20, WIG40, WIGdiv, Respect Index, New Connect Lead companies and
128 companies taking part in the "Environmentally Friendly Company" national ecology competition).
Qualitative research was conducted on a sample of 384 companies from the New Connect market and
10 selected companies taking part in the “Environmentally Friendly Company” national competition.
48
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
The research concentrated on the issue of shaping the business models of companies operating on
the New Connect alternative trading system, organized by the Warsaw Stock Exchange, aiming to
increase their value; its objective was to design the so-called sustainable business model of mature
companies that build value over the long term and that operate on the Stock Exchange, in the following
indexes: WIG20, WIG40, WIGdiv, Respect Index, New Connect Lead and companies participating
in the "Environmentally Friendly Company" national ecology competition. To study companies at
the early stage of development, the component approach by S.M. Shafer, H.I, Smith, I.C. Lander [61]
(p. 202) and work by M. Jabło ´ nski [62] (p. 39–47) were applied to shape the configuration of the
business model. As far as the assumptions of the Value-Based Management concept are concerned,
works by A. Rappaport [63] and T. Copelland, T. Koller and J. Murrin [64] were used. To study the
business models of mature companies, the approach of combining VBM and CSR concepts promoted
by J.D. Martin, J.W. Petty, J.S. Wallace [65] and work by A. Jabło ´ nski [66] were used. The combination
of these assumptions resulted in a coherent approach to examining business models from the point of
view of the life cycle criterion. Business models change over time due to the influence of internal and
external factors. In the relevant literature, the issue of business model changeability during the life
cycle of the company has been studied broadly. Also, no extensive analyses have been conducted on
transforming business models from the idea of building a business model configuration conducive to
the creation of value, achieving scalability of the business model to obtaining the strategic balance of a
holistic nature in relation to different areas.
The comparative table below shows the characteristics of a business model at the early stage of
development and a sustainable business model. (see Table 1).
Table 1. Characteristics of a business model at an early stage of development and a sustainable
business model.
Business Model Characteristic
Description of the Characteristic
of a Business Model at an Early
Stage of Development
Description of the Characteristic
of a Sustainable Business Model
Recipients of a business model Focus primarily on shareholders Focus on shareholders and
other stakeholders
Business perspective Short-term Long-term
The stage of the application of
management methods
and concepts
Initial Advanced
Business model dynamics Very high Stable
Organizational culture Changing significantly Stable
Innovation Very big Stable
Access to capital Difficult Relatively easy
Possibility of bankruptcy High Low
The study process and its scope are presented in Figure 3.
The life cycle of a business model is graphically depicted. During initiation and growth, business
models of the companies at an early stage of development, listed on the New Connect alternative
Warsaw Stock Exchange market, were examined. The maturity stage was examined as regards the
companies with a strong market position in WIG20, WIG40, WIGdiv, and the Respect Index indexes.
For both research areas, i.e., the early and mature stages of development, research hypotheses were
formulated regarding the impact of various factors on building company value through developing
business models. Research findings for both stages of company activity are presented below in
Sections 7 and 8.
49
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
􀈱
Figure 3. The structure and scope of the study.
7. The Findings of the Research on Business Models at an Early Stage of Development
Reviewing the trends in the Polish economy, the authors concluded that the most appropriate
place where people use the idea of the business model is the Warsaw Stock Exchange. The New
Connect alternative trading market is significant in the process of designing business models that
create value in the initial stages of company development. The market has been operating in Poland
since 30 August 2007, and commenced operations in a relatively difficult and deteriorating external
environment. Despite the adverse conditions, the growth rate of IPOs (Initial Public Offerings) and the
financing of their development was very high, through the market of both private and public offers
prior to entry onto the New Connect market and thereafter [67] (p. 5). For the first few years of its
operation, the market has produced satisfactory results. The measures of this are that of more than
400 companies listed on New Connect, about 20 companies have moved to the main market since the
index was created; issuers in the alternative market have the choice of nearly 100 authorized advisers;
the capitalization of all companies listed on New Connect is PLN 9.024 billion; investors may earn
as much as 1875% on debut; the record drop in the share value of New Connect-listed companies
to date is 99%; and there are three segments of issuers, namely ASO-NCLEAD, the best companies,
NC HLR, companies with low liquidity, and NC SHLR, high-risk companies [68] (p. 37). Analyzing
the data, it is possible to surmise that New Connect creates research conditions which facilitate a
better understanding of the configuration of business models of Polish companies conducive to value
creation. An examination of the business models of companies listed on New Connect in the context of
the company value criterion is interesting, as such comprehensive studies have not been conducted to
date. No recommendations on the development of these business models have been formulated, either.
It can be assumed that the configuration of business models determines their efficiency, and that
skillful and rational management multiplies the wealth of investors. Managers of companies listed on
New Connect should be aware of the strength of their business models on the path to the creation of
value. They should also know the factors determining their design, modification and adjustment aimed
at continually multiplying value for shareholders and the company, and should understand the rules
affecting the ability to effectively manage business models. A business model is a kind of system which
is composed of many elements, a proper configuration of which should facilitate the achievement of
the ultimate goal, which is an increase in company value. The originally set goal has been expanded
and new objectives have emerged during preliminary research, namely identifying the methods and
50
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
tools used by the company in terms of monitoring the value creation process, the degree to which the
company is results-oriented and the objective of building systems of value-based management.
The main purpose of the research was to assess the development of business models of Polish
companies conducive to the creation of their value. In order to verify this relationship, it was necessary
to formulate the following partial hypotheses:
The research sample was companies listed on New Connect at the time of conducting the
research (desk research: 384 companies on New Connect), quantitative research (a research sample
of 48 companies on New Connect) and qualitative research (12 companies selected from among
the 384 companies listed on New Connect on 24 May 2012 which met the criteria of representative
companies). Two case studies were developed. Research was conducted from November 2011 to May
2012, and research triangulation was applied. In terms of desk research, 384 companies listed on New
Connect were studied. The research model adopted ensured the diversity of the research sample in
terms of geography and the type of business. Furthermore, it ensured diversity among the business
models used. Analysis was conducted based on public documents:
´ the information document from the debut on New Connect,
´ financial statements,
´ financial analyses carried out by brokerage houses, investment houses and banks.
The analysis included an assessment of changes in the quotations of companies on the market.
The companies were evaluated on the day of their debut, after 52 weeks of the floating date (if time of
operation on the market was less than 52 weeks, its total operating time on New Connect was taken
into account), and on the day the research was conducted. Within the framework of the quantitative
research, the sample was selected in such a way that the objectives could be achieved. The companies
surveyed were capital companies, mainly small- or medium-sized. Analyzing the territorial scope of
activities of the surveyed companies, it should be noted that half of them operate on the international
market, 37.5% operate on a national scale, while 12.5% only operate regionally. None of the companies
operate only locally, which indicates the high potential and innovative character of their product
offer. Therefore, the products and services they offer find both a national and international audience.
As part of the qualitative analysis of business models, companies that achieved a positive return at
the end of 2011 were selected (their rate of return at the end of the period was positive); moreover,
the degree to which they fulfilled forecasts specified in the information document was not less than
90%. This criterion was adopted in order to select, out of all companies listed on New Connect, those
companies that were the best in terms of the scope of value creation for investors and, at the same time,
which demonstrated their effectiveness compared to their forecasts. A representative sample obtained
in this way was used to prepare business models that were favorable to value creation. At the end of
2011, 338 companies in total were listed on the New Connect alternative market. During the period
from 1 January 2011 to 31 December 2011, only 64 entities achieved a positive return at the end of the
period. These companies accounted for only 18.9% of all listed companies. An additional criterion
used in the analysis was the price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio and the price-to-book value (P/BV) ratio.
The criterion for accepting companies for the research project was the requirement of positive values
for both ratios. This additional criterion was fulfilled by 36 companies, accounting for 10.6% of all
listed companies at the end of 2011. In particular, the assessment of indicators of the degree to which
the net profit assumed in financial forecasts had been achieved was adopted. The indicators were
compared with the annual updated rates of return. It was also assumed that the company should have
been listed on New Connect for not less than six months—which means that its debut on New Connect
was before 1 June 2011. In the original version of the concept of qualitative research on business
models, it was assumed that the company should have been listed not less than 12 months prior (i.e.,
its debut was before 1 January 2011). However, after preparing a sample meeting the proposed criteria,
it turned out that only 14 companies fulfilled the criteria. It was agreed that this number was too small
to conduct research reliably. Therefore, a decision was taken to accept companies with a shorter period
51
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
of operation on New Connect. Presence on New Connect, which is characterized by very dynamic
changes, for a period of six months, and maintaining investor confidence during this time (expressed
in a positive rate of return), can provide a platform for formulating reliable conclusions in terms of
the business model configuration, conducive to the process of company value creation. Out of all the
companies listed on New Connect, 32 companies (accounting for 9.5% of all the listed companies at
the end of 2011) fulfilled all the criteria to be accepted for analysis.
When the percentage share of these companies on New Connect at the end of 2011 was compared
to the percentage share of companies examined in the NC Index (NewConnect Index), the total share
of 32 companies in the NC Index was obtained, which amounted to 16.9%. The value of the percentage
share in the NC Index was almost twice the percentage share in total. This means that the capitalization
of New Connect companies meeting the criteria was above average. A total of 12 companies were
selected for the qualitative analysis of business models, which accounts for 3.1% of all the companies
listed on New Connect at the end of 2011. In order to assess the accuracy of the research sampling, the
percentage share of those companies on the New Connect market at the end of 2011 was compared to
the percentage share of the NC Index companies. In this way, the quantitative share was compared
with the capitalization of companies. The total share of these 12 companies in the NC Index was
6.05%, and the value of the percentage share in the NC Index was almost twice the percentage share
of the total. This means that the capitalization of New Connect companies meeting the criteria was
above average. Being aware of the limitations resulting from the number of companies approved, they
were accepted in terms of conducting the research. All 12 companies selected for qualitative research
met the criterion of the degree of at least 90% net profit achieved when compared to that assumed in
the financial forecasts (the level of 90% was established based on accepting 10% divergence from the
expected result). Two examples were selected for the case study analysis: in the first one, an increase
in company value was observed and the business model was not changed, and in the second, financial
forecasts were not fulfilled and the business model had to be modified (strong pressure from investors
and theWarsaw Stock Exchange Board), which resulted in the company changing its configuration
and a significant increase in the share price.
There is no doubt that the business model of a company at an early stage of development is
characterized by attributes other than a mature business model. Every company goes through different
stages of development, which may change due to the specific nature of the business models. The stages
may be as follows: conception, development, commercialization, consolidation, and maturity. At the
initial stage of company operation are conception, development and commercialization. A business
model should be designed in such a way that, at the expected stage of achievements, a unique
combination of resources focuses on the value chain. It is also favorable to take an appropriate position
in the value network in order to capture value. Moving from one priority to another in order to
create value characterizes the dynamics of the business model. Managers’ knowledge of the business
model structure and ability to adapt it skillfully develops the ability to create value [2] (pp. 411–412).
The configuration of the business model at the initial stage of company development is based on the
basic attributes and is supported with management methods and techniques focused on the concept of
project management. The simplicity of the business model should be its strength as, when combined
with a unique configuration of attributes, it can lead to a company gaining competitive advantage,
which can thus create value for shareholders. The research and analysis conducted allowed us to
prove the main hypothesis: Company value is created by shaping the configuration of the business
model components. All the hypotheses presented in Figure 3 are true. Figure 4 shows the results of
research on shaping the business models conducive to the creation of value for companies in the early
stages of development (companies listed on New Connect). The numerical values indicate the strength
of the correlation between different components and value creation (or destruction). The proposed
configuration of the business model components shown in Figure 3 is the result of extensive literature
research related to identifying individual components constituting the structure for describing a business
model. The final number of components is a result of the reduction of the components that, based
52
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
on preliminary research, were not considered by respondents to have an impact on the creation of
company value. The research findings indicate the components of the business model configuration that
are of significance to the process of value creation for shareholders. The most important components
include: customer relationships, value proposals for customers and brands, configuration of unique
resources, quality of supplier products, and configuration of the value chain. These components of the
business model configuration of companies at an early stage of development should be thoroughly
evaluated and strengthened in order to increase the value of these companies. The stronger the correlation
between the creation of value and the business model component, the bigger the effect on the increasing
value. In addition, product and business model innovation increases the chances of creating value for
shareholders. Companies whose business models are characterized by higher rates of innovation have a
higher price-to-earnings ratio (P/E) and price-to-book value ratio (P/BV). The price-to-book value ratio
shows the attractiveness of the business model used, meaning that the company has a business model
with the potential for value creation. Companies that build dynamic measurement systems based on
the defined key business model components control the company better in order to increase its value.
Defined business model components determine the design of the indicators for monitoring company
value. Companies that are characterized by the ability to obtain their net income forecasts achieve
increased levels of P/E and P/BV as well as higher annual rates of return.
􀈱
y = 10.336x - 2.8415
R² = 0.7533
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
-6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Annual rate of return
Assessment of business
model innovation
Figure 4. Relationship between a business model and the creation of value (in terms of value for
investors)—correlation results [2].
In order to rate the relationship between a business model (described by means of business model
innovation and product innovation) and the value of a P/E ratio and to rate the shape and strength
between these characteristics, a statistical correlation was calculated.
Figure 4 shows the correlation results. In order to determine whether there is a correlation
between a business model and a P/E ratio and, if so, how strong it is, Pearson’s correlation coefficient
(an unloaded estimate of the correlation coefficient rxy) has been applied; the coefficient measuring the
level of a linear relationship between the variables is rxy = 0.86 for the variables tested.
The figure of 0.86 indicates that the correlation between a business model and a P/E ratio is
strong. In addition, the significance of the correlation was determined by calculating the value of
the function t for a correlation coefficient. The number of experimental points equals the number of
companies listed on New Connect; it is 24.05.2012 and n = 384. We accept the hypothesis Ho, that there
is a correlation between a business model and a P/E ratio, and the alternative hypothesis H1, that
there is no correlation between these characteristics. The value of the t-statistic, which has a Student’s
t distribution is t = 1.9. The level of significance is α = 0.05 (standard for the population). We calculate a
probability of p = 0.07. Since p > α, we accept the null hypothesis, and we reject the possible alternative
hypothesis—there is a correlation between the studied characteristics. (see Table 2).
53
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
Table 2. Relationship between a business model and the creation of value (in terms of value for investors) [2].
Statistical Value Business Model/Value Creation
Pearson’s r 0.86
Coefficient of determination R2 0.7789
n 384
Figure 4 shows the data from the 384 companies listed on New Connect with a price-to-earnings
ratio and the ranking of the attractiveness of business models in terms of an innovation criterion.
It turns out that many companies have a high P/E ratio at a high ranking of the attractiveness of their
business model, while conversely, a low ranking in terms of the attractiveness of a business model
occurs in the case of many companies with a low or even negative P/E ratio. Therefore, it can be
concluded that a price/earnings ratio is a good measure of business model attractiveness and can, in
the long term, be used as an indicator thereof.
The result indicates that if we assume that a business model is effective when the degree of
financial targets for the future in relation to the pursued strategy is at least 90%, a strong correlation,
obtained as a result of research, between the extent to which the forecast net profit is achieved and an
updated annual rate of return proves the relationship between a business model and an increase in
value. It is possible to select such business models that enable the implementation of both forecasts
and the achievement of positive returns.
To rate the relationship between business model components and an increase in company value
(rated based on the answers chosen by managers in the survey), values of the mode, the median, and
the arithmetic mean were determined for the factors studied. (see Table 3)
Table 3. Impact of business model components on an increase in value [2].
The Most Significant Business Model Component Mode Median Arithmetic
Mean
Standard
Deviation
the customer 5 5 4.2771 1.0215
value proposition for the customer 5 4 4.1023 0.9586
competitive strategy 5 4 4.0448 0.9753
position in the value network 4 4 4.0089 0.9981
logic of generating income 5 4 3.9213 1.0269
organization of internal suppliers and their key capabilities 4 4 3.5474 1.4077
All business model components were then analyzed in terms of the influence of individual
components from the subsystem on the business model (see Table 4). The following factors were rated:
– the customer,
– value proposition for the customer,
– logic of generating income,
– organization of internal suppliers and their key capabilities,
– competitive strategy,
– position in the value network.
The value of the t-statistic, which has a Student’s t distribution, is t = 2.01. The level of significance
is α = 0.05 (standard for this population). We calculate the probability of p = 0.06. Since p > α we
accept the null hypothesis, and reject the alternative hypothesis—there is the correlation between the
studied criteria.
54
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
Table 4. Impact of business model components on the creation of value [2].
Component Statistical
Significance α
Pearson Coefficients of
Determination R2 Relationship
Customer 0.05 0.81 0.77 Very strong
Value proposition for the customer 0.05 0.84 0.66 Very strong
Logic of generating income 0.05 0.74 0.64 Strong
Organization of internal suppliers 0.05 0.69 0.71 Strong
Type of strategy pursued 0.05 0.72 0.71 Strong
Position in the value network 0.05 0.73 0.79 Strong
Configuration of the value chain 0.05 0.82 0.56 Very strong
The test for the significance of the correlation coefficient proves the relationship between the
studied criteria. The correlation is significant and strong, as indicated by the low probability coefficient.
Correlations are statistically significant (at the level of p < 0.1).
The most important stakeholders are located by their impact on the value of the company and
their importance for achieving long-term value.
By analogy, it is possible to adjust business models to market leaders (business model
benchmarking). (see Figure 5).
􀈱
Figure 5. The generalized shape of a business model using the statistical correlation between
components which ensure the creation of value for shareholders [2] (p. 337).
55
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
By making dynamic changes in the configuration of the business model, it is possible to adjust it
to develop the ability to create value. The results have been analyzed based on this assumption.
Research and analysis conducted on business models of companies at an early stage of development
in the context of activity on the capital market have allowed us to draw the following conclusions:
(1) Referring to the review of the relevant literature on business models and value-based
management, a theoretical configuration of business models was developed. The results indicate
that a business model should be a unique form of resources focused on the value chain. It is
also favorable to take an appropriate position in the value network in order to capture value.
Moving from one priority to another in order to create value characterizes the dynamics of the
business model. Managers’ knowledge of the business model structure and its skillful adaptation
develops the ability to create value.
(2) Based on the research, the importance of the impact of individual components of the business
model on company value was determined. The results allowed us to build a business model
structure that indicates what the optimal configuration of the efficient and effective business
model should be like. The main components were identified, which include the value proposition
for the customer, the customer himself and the configuration of the value chain. The key
subsystems of these components were also specified, which indicate what configuration, from
among those proposed in the theoretical model, works best for managers, in the context of the
criterion of company value. These include: in the area of the customer, relationships; in the value
proposition for the customer, brand and innovation; in the area of revenue generation logic, the
configuration of unique resources; in the area of organization of internal suppliers, the quality
of provided services. The model presents the link between the components and their impact
on the configuration of the business model conducive to the creation of value. The structure of
a business model which is favorable to the creation of value should be consistent and should
include the above-mentioned priorities. It depends highly on the configuration of the value chain.
(3) The analysis of the correlation of the degree to which the financial forecasts of net profit described
in the annual information documents are fulfilled with the updated rates of return of companies
listed on New Connect showed a high correlation coefficient at 0.79. If we assume that the
efficiency of the business model is verified by the fulfillment of forecasts, the hypothesis that
there is a relationship between the business model and the value increase can be proved. Business
model configuration management aims to improve its effectiveness, including the fulfillment
of expected forecasts, favors the creation of value and is verified with the values of return rates.
Fulfilling forecasts, or failing to do so, significantly affects return rates.
(4) In order to assess the factors affecting the rate of company value growth, 23 factors were
determined, of which the factors that are most important to New Connect companies include:
(a) relationships with customers,
(b) a full understanding of customer needs,
(c) the ability to create unique value for the customer which is not offered by competitors.
(5) Having analyzed a designed portfolio of business model innovation and product innovation,
it was concluded that as many as 63% of all companies listed on New Connect are characterized
neither by an innovative business model nor by innovative products, which significantly affects
the performance of these companies and, at the same time, their market value.
(6) Companies which were characterized by both innovative business models and innovative
products, recognized as models of this market, accounted for only 10% of the New Connect index.
If one looks at this phenomenon positively, in the future one in 10 companies on New Connect
may, through capital gained on New Connect, build the elite class of companies changing the
rules of the game in the sectors in which they operate.
(7) Comparing two extreme sets (the first characterized by an innovative business model and
innovative products—only 10% of the companies surveyed; the second, characterized by an
56
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
unimaginative business model and products—63% of companies), the result is not promising.
It is necessary to verify either the potential of the business model component configuration of
these companies, or specify stricter criteria for floating on the New Connect market, which should
include elements of innovation.
(8) During further research on the issue of whether there is a relationship between the business
model and company value, it was concluded that there is a very strong correlation between the
business model evaluated according to the criteria of innovation and the price/earnings ratio, at
a figure of 0.86. The correlation between the degree to which financial forecasts of net profit are
fulfilled and the average updated annual rate of return is strong and stands at 0.79. The results
obtained give a strong message to theoreticians and practitioners of management that investment
in innovation and diligent work towards fulfilling financial forecasts translate into the strong
creation of value.
(9) There is strong pressure frominvestors and the board of theWarsaw Stock Exchange to ensure that
the forecasts published by the companies are reliable, as this significantly affects the modification
of business models used by these companies.
The results presented show that the principles of sustainability as regards the companies at an
early stage of development and with respect to incorporating them into the genotype of business
models of companies at an early stage of development are used inconsistently and only selectively.
The situation is different for mature companies where sustainability is regarded as a value driver.
8. Research Findings on Business Models at the Mature Stage of Development
In conducting research on sustainable business models, the main hypothesis and 11 auxiliary
hypotheses were proposed. The main hypothesis is that: the joint realization of the concepts of
corporate social responsibility and value-based management affects the balance of the company’s
potential and how (and whether) the needs of different groups of stakeholders are fulfilled, which, as a
result, translates into an increase in the long-term value of the company.
In the research conducted, in order to prove the proposed hypotheses, the principles of
triangulation were used. The methodological triangulation applied covered three types of research:
quantitative research, qualitative research and research based on the expert method.
The main objective of the research was to create a holistic sustainable business model contributing
to building the long-term value of a socially responsible company. The scope of the research
covered companies currently listed on theWarsaw Stock Exchange, on the following stock indexes:
WIG20, WIG40, WIGdiv, Respect Index, New Connect Lead and companies participating in the
“Environmentally Friendly Company” competition; 128 companies that adhered to the principles of
corporate social responsibility with a strong theme of environmental responsibility participated in the
first stage of the research, on the analysis of the results of the “Environmentally Friendly Company”
ecology competition. In the second phase, survey questionnaires were sent to 100 companies listed on
the Polish Stock Market Respect Index, WIG20, WIG40, WIGdiv and NewConnect Lead. In the first
part, the companies completed a self-assessment questionnaire and underwent a competition audit,
while in the second part, research surveys (questionnaires) were sent to the companies that voluntarily
self-assessed by completing the questionnaires. The return rate was 44%, which is a satisfactory result.
The research sample was selected so that it would fulfill the objectives included in the subject of
the paper. The selection of the Respect Index companies, which included companies operating in
accordance with best practices in information governance, corporate governance, investor relationships,
CSR policy, environmental management, personnel policy, and management systems, aimed to receive
answers from companies which consciously follow the principles of corporate social responsibility.
The Respect Index companies satisfy the strict requirements of corporate social responsibility, pursue
corporate responsibility strategies, or follow an orderly plan of action in terms of company social
responsibility/sustainable development. This strategy is created based on business objectives, taking
into account the key risks (specific and industry) and results from the need to examine the needs and
57
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
expectations of significant stakeholder groups. It is pursued on the basis of the schedule adopted
and performance measures (results, benefits). The Respect Index is an index of socially responsible
companies in Central and Eastern Europe, which includes companies from the main market of the
Warsaw Stock Exchange in its portfolio and is one of the indicators that builds their credibility in
the eyes of investors. A key element of the business model of the Respect Index companies is an
increase in their value, taking into account the principles of corporate social responsibility and the
needs of stakeholders.
Questionnaires were also sent to the largest listed companies, that is WSE WIG20 and WIG40
companies, in order to examine these companies in terms of the application of corporate social
responsibility and value-based management principles. To fully supplement the sample so that it
met the criteria related to all hypotheses assumed, a survey questionnaire was also sent to WIGdiv
companies, which is the revenue index (dividends and subscription rights taken into account). WIGdiv
comprises the largest companies with high liquidity, which regularly pay dividends to shareholders.
The index also includes certain WIG20 companies. The selection of companies in the index was
determined by the specific character of these companies, namely that their business model is based on
generating profit and regularly paying dividends to shareholders, and focuses on observing the rules
of so-called sustainable dividends, which are consistent with the principles of sustainable business.
Due to the fact that there is an important correlation between the adopted company business model
and its stock index, companies of this index are also included in the research sample.
On the other hand, engagement in corporate social responsibility was also important in the selection
of companies. Research was also conducted on 128 companies participating in the Environmentally
Friendly Company ecology competition, which promoted the principles of environmental responsibility
and sustainable development by creating effective strategies built on ecological criteria.
The research was extended further with the qualitative analysis of 10 companies whose profiles
matched the companies from the area of quantitative research, i.e., Respect Index, WIG20, WIG40,
WIGdiv and New Connect Lead companies. Ten joint-stock companies were selected, all of which
implement corporate social responsibility principles in order to increase competitive advantage and
build long-term value. At the same time, these companies, in addition to fulfilling the criteria of
ecological responsibility, met the fuller and broader criteria of corporate social responsibility.
The selection of the research sample was as follows:
To achieve the main objective of the study related to the achievement of the expected and assumed
state, which is developing a holistic model of sustainable business contributing to building long-term
value of a socially responsible company, surveys as well as expert studies were conducted using an
evaluation questionnaire and analytical studies of existing documents related to the Respect Index stock
exchange. A research criterion for choosing research companies was developed, and the analysis was
conducted in terms of both subjective and objective criteria. As regards the subjective criterion, all forms
of business activity in Polish legislation were analyzed: sole traders, partnerships, general partnerships,
other partnerships, corporations (limited liability companies, joint stock companies). As far as an
objective criterion is concerned, after reviewing the literature and business practices, evaluation criteria
were defined that aim to properly select the profiles of the companies surveyed. These criteria include:
company valuation (a company is subjected to valuation), the pattern of management “best practices”
(it may be considered that the adopted management mechanisms, and the degree to which modern
management methods and concepts are used, exceed standards in the Polish economy), a minimum
market presence of 10 years (the maturity stage in business—in the author’s opinion, a minimum
10-year presence in the market indicates that the company wants to continue its business activity,
develop, gain competitive advantage, ensure business continuity and build the long-term value of
the company), the principles of corporate governance are fulfilled (a company wants to operate in
accordance with the standards of corporate governance, wants to conduct direct and indirect dialogue
with shareholders through their representatives in the supervisory board of the company, wants to
seek the most effective forms of communication, dialogue and relationships to achieve satisfactory
58
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
performance), social responsibility is observed (a company which fulfills the principles of corporate
social responsibility and includes them in the principles of doing business, wants to balance the
interests of major groups of stakeholders and wishes to observe the law, follow core values, care for
the environment, and generate profits for shareholders by building an organizational culture that
helps achieve this goal), functions in various sectors of the economy and services (companies operate
in different sectors, therefore the picture of the study will have a cross-sectoral dimension and the
solutions developed during the study and the design of a business model have a chance to be applied
in various sectors of the economy and services). (see Tables 5 and 6)
Table 5. Legal form of the winners of the three previous editions of the “Environmentally Friendly
Company” (FB´S) competition from 2006–2008 [3].
Legal Form FB´S 2006 FB´S 2007 FB´S 2008 Legal Form—FB´S
2006–2008
Joint-stock company 7 16 17 40
Limited Liability Company 22 28 25 75
General Partnership 2 1 1 4
Other 4 3 2 9
Total 35 48 45 128
Table 6. Type of business activity of the winners of the three previous editions of the “Environmentally
Friendly Company” (FB´S) competition from 2006, 2007 and 2008 [3].
Type of Activity FB´S 2006 FB´S 2007 FB´S 2008 Type of Activity—FB´S
2006–2008
Production 11 13 12 36
Services 14 22 21 57
Trade 1 1 2 4
Production and services 5 5 6 16
Production and trade 1 2 1 4
Production, services, trade 1 3 2 6
Trade and services 2 2 1 5
Total 35 48 45 128
8.1. The Company’s Business Model Based on Fulfilling the Assumptions of the Concept of Corporate
Social Responsibility
Companies’ application of the assumptions of the concept of corporate social responsibility has its
own internal reference because it is based on ethical principles within the organization, that on the one
hand affect decision-making systems, and on the other hand the external environment of the company,
shaping its social dimension and image in the market. The conscious application of CSR assumptions
was the first area studied of the activity of companies that agreed to take part in research. (see Table 7)
Table 7. Impact of organizational cultures based on social responsibility and value-based
management—statistical values [3].
Statistical Value Value
Pearson 0.6599
Coefficient of determination R2 0.4355
n 44.00
Figure 6 shows the correlation results. In order to determine whether the assumed correlation
between organizational cultures based on CSR and VBM exists and whether it is strong, Pearson’s
coefficient was applied to the values (unloaded estimate of the correlation coefficient rxy); it is
59
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
a coefficient determining the level of a linear relationship between the variables. The calculated
coefficient is rxy = 0.66.
Figure 6. A graph showing the impact of organizational cultures based on social responsibility and
value-based management [3].
It can be inferred from the calculation that the relationship is strong, but its significance is
determined by the results of the t-test for the correlation coefficient. The number of experimental
points is n = 44. We accept the null hypothesis Ho, that there is a correlation between CSR criteria and
VBM, and the alternative hypothesis H1, that there is no correlation between the criteria.
The value of the t-statistic, which has a Student’s t distribution is t = 2.3. The level of significance
is α = 0.05 (standard for this population). We calculate the probability of p = 0.06. Since p > α, we accept
the null hypothesis, and therefore we reject the possible alternative hypothesis—there is a correlation
between the studied factors.
The test for the significance of the correlation coefficient proved the relationship between
organizational culture criteria based on social responsibility and value-based management.
The correlation is significant and strong, as indicated by the low coefficient of probability. Correlations
were statistically significant (p < 0.1).
Subsequently, a statistical relationship between corporate social responsibility and balancing the
potential of the company was calculated, as well as between value-based management factors and
balancing its potential. In order to determine whether a correlation exists and, if so, the strength
thereof, Pearson’s coefficient was applied to the values (unloaded estimate of the correlation coefficient
rxy); it is a coefficient determining the level of a linear relationship between the variables. The results
of the calculations are presented in the table below (Table 8).
Table 8. Impact of organizational cultures based on social responsibility and value-based management
on balancing the potential of the company [3].
Statistical Value CSR/Sustainability VBM/Sustainability
Pearson 0.409 0.508
Coefficients of determination R2 0.17 0.26
n 44.00 44.00
For the correlation between the factors of social responsibility and balancing the potential of the
company, the statistical value t is adopted, which has a Student’s t distribution t = 2.01. The level of
significance is α = 0.05 (standard for this population). We calculate the probability of p = 0.054. Since
p > α, we accept the null hypothesis, and we reject the possible alternative hypothesis—there is a
correlation between the studied factors.
For the correlation between the factors of value-based management and balancing the potential of
the company, the statistical value t is adopted, which has a Student’s t distribution t = 2.01. The level
60
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
of significance is α = 0.05 (standard for this population). We calculate the probability of p = 0.054.
Since p > α, we accept the null hypothesis, and we reject the possible alternative hypothesis—there is a
correlation between the studied factors.
It can be inferred that there is no basis to reject the research hypothesis H3, which says that the
joint use of the concepts of corporate social responsibility (CSR) and value-based management (VBM)
balances the potentials of the company.
Research clearly shows that most of the companies have an organizational culture based on
organizational behavior deeply embedded in the joint implementation of the principles of corporate
social responsibility and value-based management. The companies surveyed want to apply the
principles of sustainable development and growth aimed at long-term functioning and continuous
profit generation, limiting the possibility of uncontrolled risks and building a positive relationship with
the environment. The value of the company depends on the skill of balancing its potentials (balancing
a company’s internal factors).
The most important elements of an organizational equilibrium concept are associated with the
driving forces behind a sustainable business model and can be synthetically presented in the following
relationships with sustainability related to:
‚ material balance (expressed as the strength of the economic sustainability of the company) and
social balance (expressed as the strength of the conscious application of the principles of corporate
social responsibility);
‚ internal balance, related to the strength of balancing the company’s internal processes, and
external balance, expressed as the strength of stakeholders.
As well as sustainability instruments related to:
‚ Strategy expressed as the strength of implementing a sustainable strategy based on the principles
of a balanced scorecard.
‚ Procedures related to the strength of the management style based on the logic of conscious
decision-making.
‚ Culture expressed as the strength of the conscious application of the principles of corporate governance.
‚ Structure expressed as the strength of a consensual relationship between company management,
shareholders, stakeholders.
In order to test the strength of the relationships, the correlation between sustainability
and sustainability instruments was analyzed. Balance has a material and social, internal and
external dimension. Organizational balance (material, social) is based on the mutual adaptation of
intraorganizational relationships and the relationship between the organization and the environment in a
manner that satisfies the criteria of balance. It is associated with the strength of the conscious application
of the principles of corporate social responsibility and the strength of economic sustainability.
Social imbalance is expressed primarily in the reduction of activities for the organization and the
delegitimization of the organization and its activities in the environment; companies then reduce their
commitment to social responsibility.
Material imbalance is expressed as reducing the economic efficiency of operations and reducing
material resources provided by the organization environment. Thus, the strength of economic
sustainability, related to value-based management (VBM), becomes an element requiring improvement.
Imbalance provides both a stimulus for change and innovation, transferring the imbalance to other
areas, as well as for actions to regain balance and to re-define the company’s criteria. The company has
a number of sustainability instruments. The research examined sustainability instruments such
as developing a strategy, procedures, programs, budgets, formal business structures, operating
rules, procedures and systems, and organizational cultures, which aim to ensure organizational
performance—this is expressed as the strength of the management style based on the logic of
conscious decision-making.
61
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
The strength of the relationship between sustainability and sustainability instruments is related to
the harmony between the four basic areas of balance—material, social, external and internal—where
conflicts and contradictions may occur between balance requirements.
In order to determine whether there is a correlation between sustainability and sustainability
instruments and, if so, whether it is strong, Pearson’s coefficient (an unloaded estimate of the correlation
coefficient rxy) was applied to the values; it is a coefficient determining the level of a linear relationship
between the variables. The calculated coefficient is rxy = 0.659 (Table 9).
Table 9. Impact of organizational cultures based on social responsibility and value-based
management—statistical values [3].
Statistical Value Value
Pearson 0.659
Coefficient of determination R2 0.511
n 44.00
Based on the calculation, it can be inferred that the relationship is strong, but its significance
is determined by the results of a correlation coefficient t-test. The number of experimental points is
n = 44. We accept the null hypothesis Ho, that there is a correlation between CSR and VBM criteria,
and the alternative hypothesis H1, that there is no correlation between the criteria.
The value of the t-statistic, which has Student’s t distribution, is t = 1.95. The level of significance
is α = 0.05 (standard for this population). We calculate the probability of p = 0.06. Since p > α, we accept
the null hypothesis and we reject the possible alternative hypothesis—there is a correlation between
the studied factors.
The test for the significance of the correlation coefficient proved the relationship between
sustainability and sustainability instruments. This correlation is significant and strong, as indicated by
the low probability coefficient. Correlations are statistically significant (p < 0.1).
Due to the fact that the selection of factors for the individual balance and sustainability
components depends entirely on the market situational context, managers choose the most valuable
current factors out of the package of corporate social responsibility and value-based management
factors, which guarantee that the forecasted results are achieved in a defined time interval. This is in
fact the creation of a sustainable business model that can be applied in various sectors of the economy.
From this perspective, we talk about a cross-sectoral holistic sustainable business model. (see Table 10).
Trust has the greatest impact on value and sales growth in the company, and the least impact
on investment in the company’s working capital, as well as on investment in the company’s fixed
capital—the average weight of this factor is 4.3 (on a scale of 1 to 5). Corporate image and brand
awareness have the greatest impact on the company’s competitive advantage, and the least impact on
investment in working capital, as well as on the company’s fixed capital—the average weight of this
factor is 3.9 (on a scale of 1 to 5). Competency—the average weight of this factor is 3.9 (on a scale of 1 to
5)—has the greatest impact on sales growth in the company and the company’s competitive advantage,
and the least impact on investment in the company’s working and fixed capital. The principles of
corporate governance have the greatest impact on the company’s competitive advantage, and the
least impact on two factors: investment in the company’s working capital and investment in fixed
capital—the average weight of this factor is 4.4 (on a scale of 1 to 5). Customer relationships have the
greatest impact on sales growth and the company’s competitive advantage. This factor has the least
impact on investment in working capital and fixed capital—the average weight of this factor is 4.6
(on a scale of 1 to 5). The network of stakeholders has the greatest impact on sales growth and the
company’s competitive advantage. It has the least impact on operating profit margins, investment
in working capital and fixed capital—the average weight of this factor is 4.6 (on a scale of 1 to 5).
Company resources have the greatest impact on investment in working capital and investment in fixed
capital, and the least impact on the company’s value—the average weight of this factor is 4.3 (on a
62
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
scale of 1 to 5). Social capital has the greatest impact on value and sales growth in the company, as well
as the company’s competitive advantage, while it has the least impact on investment in the company’s
fixed capital—the average weight of this factor is 3.4 (on a scale of 1 to 5). Customer relationships
and the network of stakeholders are factors with the greatest impact in most areas. Expressed values,
environmental products/services, and social capital are the least significant factors.
Table 10. Strength of the impact of factors [3].
Mean Score
Has the
Greatest
Impact on
Value
Has the
Greatest
Impact on
Sales Growth
in the
Company
Has the
Greatest
Impact on the
Company’s
Operating
Profit
Has the Greatest
Impact on
Investment in the
Company’s
Working Capital
Has the Greatest
Impact on
Investment in the
Company’s Fixed
Capital
Has the
Greatest
Impact on the
Company’s
Competitive
Advantage
Mean
Score
Trust 4.7 4.7 4.2 3.8 3.8 4.4 4.3
Corporate image
and brand
awareness
4.1 4.2 3.8 3.6 3.6 4.3 3.9
Competency 4.0 4.1 3.8 3.6 3.6 4.1 3.9
Principles of
corporate
governance
4.6 4.5 4.3 4.0 4.0 4.7 4.4
Customer
relationships 4.8 5.0 4.6 4.1 4.1 5.0 4.6
Network of
stakeholders 4.6 4.8 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.8 4.6
Company assets 4.1 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.5 4.2 4.3
Social capital 3.7 3.7 3.4 3.0 2.9 3.7 3.4
8.2. Research on the Fulfillment of the Needs of Different Groups of Stakeholders
In order to determine whether there is a correlation between balancing the needs of stakeholders
and their migration processes and whether it is strong, Pearson’s coefficient (an unloaded estimate of
the correlation coefficient rxy) was applied to these values; it is a coefficient determining the level of a
linear relationship between the variables. The calculated coefficient is rxy = 0.719. (see Table 11)
Table 11. Impact of organizational cultures based on social responsibility value-based
management—statistical values [3].
Statistical Value Value
Pearson 0.719
Coefficient of determination R2 0.511
n 44.00
On the basis of the calculation it can be inferred that the achieved relationship is strong, but the
significance of the correlation is determined by the results of a t-test for the correlation coefficient.
The number of experimental points is n = 44. We accept the null hypothesis Ho, that there is a correlation
between the criteria, and the alternative hypothesis H1, that there is no correlation between the criteria.
The rating of the impact of the various stakeholder groups gathered around the organization
on the value of the company is presented in Table 12. The results clearly indicate that the group
of stakeholders that have the greatest impact (average above 4.51) on the value of the company are
shareholders, followed by customers.
63
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
Table 12. Rating of the impact of the various stakeholder groups gathered around the organization on the value of the company [3].
Mean Score
Impact on
the Value
of the
Company?
Impact
on Sales
Growth?
Impact on
Operating
Profit
Margins?
Impact on
Investment
in Working
Capital?
Impact on
Investment
in Fixed
Capital?
Impact on
the
Company’s
Cost of
Capital?
Impact on
the Efficiency
of Enterprise
Income Tax?
Impact on
the
Company’s
Competitive
Advantage?
Which
Stakeholder
Demands the
Most from the
Company?
Impact on
the Value of
the
Company
Profit from
the
Relationship
with the
Company?
Impact on the
Company and
Financial
Results of the
Company?
Impact on
Business and the
Company’s
Financial
Performance?
The Most Risky
in terms of the
Impact of the
Risk on the Value
of the Company?
The
Greatest
Ability to
Reach a
Compromise
with the
Company?
Mean
Score
Shareholders,
stockholders 4.88 4.88 5.00 4.8 4.9 4.8 4.89 4.79 4.89 4.8 4.99 4.56 3.79 3.48 4.68
Customers 4.7 4.89 4.9 4.1 5 4.9 4.9 4.36 5.00 5.00 4.98 4.56 4.88 3.49 4.67
Allies 4.31 4.35 4.39 4.29 4.01 4.56 3.89 4.21 4.31 4.01 4.78 4.56 3.79 2.79 4.16
Co-operators 3.88 4.11 4.22 4.39 4.13 4.27 4.55 4.52 4.31 4.01 4.29 3.99 3.79 3.51 4.14
Financial
institutions,
lenders
4.33 4.01 4.79 4.33 4.51 4.27 4.01 4.11 4.28 4.28 4.31 3.65 2.89 3.54 4.09
Employees 3.83 4.98 3.98 3.1 4.04 4.16 4.04 4.88 4.16 4.04 3.55 3.88 4.04 3.55 4.02
Board 3.98 4.04 4.15 4.24 4.14 4.04 3.99 3.1 3.55 4.01 3.99 3.1 3.05 4.1 3.82
Media 3.79 3.99 3.79 4.01 3.87 4.1 3.79 4.2 3.98 4.01 4.14 4.01 3.14 2.1 3.78
Government,
state
institutions
3.51 3.1 3.89 3.56 3.01 3.33 3.01 3.36 3.01 3.46 3.26 3.09 2.24 1.88 3.12
Suppliers 3.21 3.21 3.16 3.12 3.21 2.98 3.04 3.04 3.16 3.04 2.88 2.49 2.32 3.32 3.01
Local
government
institutions
3.02 2.8 3.4 3.26 3.15 3 2.89 2.9 3.2 3.16 3.1 3.01 2.55 1.8 2.95
Competitors 3.03 3.05 3.1 2.66 3.51 3.11 2.91 2.7 2.51 3.14 1.69 3.01 2.51 1.79 2.77
Business
support
organizations,
chambers
of
commerce
2.28 2.6 2.1 2.55 2.13 2.16 2.56 2.98 2.71 2.66 3.21 2.25 2.55 3.2 2.59
Charities,
sports,
cultural
organizations
2.11 2.15 2.02 2.36 2.56 2.1 1.9 1.89 2.11 2.15 2.22 2.14 2.5 1.5 2.12
National,
international
society
1.99 1.89 2.01 2.05 2.15 2.01 2.15 2.14 1.97 1.89 2.4 2.22 2.04 1.49 2.03
64
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
8.3. The Application of a Sustainable Dividend Policy
In order to ensure the company’s liquidity and profitability today and in the future, companies
pay a profit in the form of dividends, which are also sustainable: the allocation of one-third of the
dividends to increase the company’s equity in order to increase business credibility, also by increasing
its debt-raising capacity; the allocation of one-third of the dividends for investments in tangible and
intangible capital; and the allocation of one-third of the dividends for consumption by the company
shareholders, who are the primary donors of cash for the development and growth of the organization
and expect satisfactory return on capital employed in the reference period they establish.
It results in significant value added, arising from the application of the principles of social
responsibility, and includes a financial dividend to shareholders paid in a sustainable manner and a
social dividend, the beneficiaries of which are all company stakeholders.
A sustainable business model has been presented based on proving the hypotheses, as shown in
Figure 5.
All the hypotheses are true. Quantitative research has been combined with qualitative research,
which was supplemented with expert analysis. Methodological triangulation has been applied, i.e.,
the use of many methods to examine a single issue. Raw data from empirical research has been used
by means of a survey questionnaire as well as secondary data from analyzing the stock exchange
and documents drawn up by companies related to applying the principles of corporate governance.
The result of the research is a sustainable business model built on the basis of seven driving forces
with marked correlations between its elements, between which the interactions occur. A holistic
sustainable business model (Figure 5) shows the key statistical links that have particularly important
implications for building the long-term value of the company. The correlations between variables
(empirical research findings using questionnaires) that are considered important have been shown.
The model is the result of empirical research with respect to the selected variables. The variables
form the shape of relationships between determinants describing an eclectic sustainable business
model. Not all variables correlate with other variables—only those that are important for building the
long-term value of the company have been shown.
On the basis of the above design of a sustainable business model, its new definition has been
developed using the proven hypotheses. The numbers in the figure indicate the statistical relationships
between the different components of the proposed sustainable business model for mature companies.
Where there are no numerical values, the relationship has not been studied and only the cause and
effect relationships have been shown as it is necessary to show them for the applied holistic approach.
A sustainable business model building the long-term value of a socially responsible company is the
model built by the joint use of the corporate social responsibility and value-based management concepts
which ensures that the needs of shareholders and other stakeholder groups are fulfilled through a
skillful balancing of the company’s potential towards generating value allocated in a sustainable way,
enabling the continuity of company management.
A sustainable business model is a hybrid model, i.e., a model built in the subject-object system.
Components of this model include entities centered on the company, forming relationships, influencing
the company value drivers and strategic factors connected with the theory of corporate social
responsibility, value-based management, the theory of stakeholders and the theory of shareholders
functioning in the mutual relationship based on the principles of sustainability. (see Figure 7).
This model is a holistic model of reduced nature, which could be applied in different sectors of
the economy, treated as a subsystem of the entire ecosystem. This means that this model and its design
are included in the middle-range theory. While determining the strategic options of the companies
surveyed, enabling the design of an effective sustainable business model, boundary conditions which
were defined in the course of constructing a 3S (Synergy, Symbiosis, Symmetry) triangle and DSB
(Durability, Sustainability, Balance) triangle must be specified.
65
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
􀈱
Figure 7. A holistic sustainable business model by A. Jabło ´ nski [3] (p. 401).
The following are the definitions of the various elements of the triangle:
(1) Synergy—the joint use of corporate social responsibility and value-based management concepts,
strengthening the company’s financial and competitive strength, aimed at building its
long-term value.
(2) Symbiosis—the co-existence of stakeholders gathered around the company, which excludes the
uncontrolled loss of the value of certain stakeholders for the benefit of other stakeholders.
(3) Symmetry—the mutual, systematic development of the individual components of the company’s
potential, while maintaining the ability to move towards higher value inherent in the market and
its stakeholder.
(4) Durability—the relationship between the strength of a consensual relationship between company
management, shareholders, and stakeholders, and the strength of the conscious application of
the principles of corporate governance.
(5) Balance—the relationship between the strength of the economic sustainability of the company,
and the strength of balancing the intellectual capital of the company.
(6) Sustainability—the relationship between the strength of the conscious application of the principles
of corporate social responsibility, and the strength of stakeholder value and the dynamics of their
migration processes.
66
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
Below are presented key recommendation:
(1) As there is no clear definition and understanding of the concept of sustainability, the authors have
developed their own definition of sustainability based on durability, sustainability and balance.
(2) Analyzing the behavior of companies based on research, making observations and reviewing
the relevant literature, the authors have constructed a 3S triangle based on synergy, symbiosis
and symmetry.
(3) In the DSB triangle, a balance point has been defined, located at the intersection of three triangle
diagonals, understood as a place where the definition of sustainability in business developed by
the authors is fully utilized.
(4) In the 3S triangle, a balance point has been defined, located at the intersection of three triangle
diagonals, understood as a place where the principles of synergy, symbiosis and symmetry are
fully used to build the long-term value of the company by means of the concept of sustainability.
(5) Overlaying two triangles on each other along with the results of the statistical analyses resulting
from the research allowed the authors to determine the strategic options of the companies
surveyed, which enabled the efficient design of a sustainable business model.
(6) From among the strategic options of the company presented, they choose the option which is
the best, in their opinion, from the point of view of resources, business life cycle, and market
relationships. (see Figure 8)
􀈱
Figure 8. The imbalance gap between the 3S triangle and DSB triangle parameters by A. Jabło ´ nski [3],
(p. 393).
When the triangles overlap and are analyzed, a new triangle, which the authors call a SS
(sustainability strength) triangle, is formed. In the SS triangle, the position of two points deviated
from the balance point—red for the deviation from balance in the 3S triangle and green in the DSB
triangle—is essential to determine the appropriate strategic options for the company. Table 2 shows
the possible strategic options for the position of these points in the SS triangle. (see Table 13)
67
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
Table 13. Possible strategic options for the positions of points of deviation from balance by A. Jabło ´ nski [3]
(p. 391–392).
No.
Deviation
in the 3S
Triangle
Deviation in
the DSB
Triangle
Description of the System
1 A—Synergy A—Durability
A relationship between corporate social responsibility and value-based
management in terms of balancing the company’s potential (the joint use of
the concepts of corporate social responsibility and value-based management
reinforcing the financial and competitive strength of the company aiming to
build its long-term value), strengthened by applying the principles of
durability, that is the relationship between the strength of a consensual
relationship of a company’s board, shareholders, and stakeholders, and the
strength of the conscious application of corporate governance principles.
2 A—Synergy B—Sustainability
A relationship between corporate social responsibility and value-based
management in terms of balancing the company’s potential (the joint use of
the concepts of corporate social responsibility and value-based management
reinforcing the financial and competitive strength of the company aiming to
build its long-term value), strengthened by applying the principles of
sustainability, that is the relationship between the strength of the company’s
economic sustainability and the strength of balancing the company’s
intellectual capital.
3 A—Synergy C—Balance
A relationship between corporate social responsibility and value-based
management in terms of balancing its potential (the joint use of the concepts
of corporate social responsibility and value-based management reinforcing
the financial and competitive strength of the company aimed to build its
long-term value), strengthened by applying the principles of balance, that is
the relationship between the strength of the conscious application of
corporate social responsibility principles and the strength of the stakeholders’
value and the dynamics of their migration processes.
4 B—Symbiosis A—Durability
Strength of stakeholders’ value and dynamics of their migration processes
(co-existence of stakeholders centered around the company, which excludes
uncontrolled loss of value of some stakeholders for the benefit of other
stakeholders), strengthened by applying the principles of durability, that is
the relationship between the strength of the consensual relationship: the
company’s board, shareholders, and stakeholders, and the strength of the
conscious application of corporate governance principles.
5 B—Symbiosis B—Sustainability
Strength of stakeholders’ value and dynamics of their migration processes
(co-existence of stakeholders centered around the company, which excludes
uncontrolled loss of value of some stakeholders for the benefit of other
stakeholders), strengthened by applying the principles of sustainability,
that is the relationship between the strength of the company’s economic
sustainability and the strength of balancing the intellectual capital of
the company.
6 B—Symbiosis C—Balance
Strength of stakeholders’ value and dynamics of their migration processes
(co-existence of stakeholders centered around the company, which excludes
uncontrolled loss of value of some stakeholders for the benefit of other
stakeholders), strengthened by applying the principles of balance, that is the
relationship between the strength of the conscious application of corporate
social responsibility principles and the strength of the stakeholders’ value
and the dynamics of their migration processes.
7 C—Symmetry A—Durability
Balance between the inside of the company and its environment (regular
development of individual components of the company’s potential, while
maintaining the possibility of shifting the company in a move towards higher
value inherent in the market and its stakeholders), strengthened by applying
the principles of durability, that is the relationship between the strength of a
consensual relationship: the company’s board, shareholders, and
stakeholders, and the strength of the conscious application of corporate
governance principles.
68
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
Table 13. Cont.
No.
Deviation
in the 3S
Triangle
Deviation in
the DSB
Triangle
Description of the System
8 C—Symmetry B—Sustainability
Balance between the inside of the company and its environment (regular
development of individual components of the company’s potential, while
maintaining the possibility of shifting the company in a move towards higher
value inherent in the market and its stakeholders), strengthened by applying
the principles of sustainability, that is the relationship between the strength
of the company’s economic sustainability and the strength of balancing the
company’s intellectual capital.
9 C—Symmetry C—Balance
Balance between the inside of the company and its environment (regular
development of individual components of the company’s potential, while
maintaining the possibility of shifting the company in a move towards higher
value inherent in the market and its stakeholders), strengthened by applying
the principles of balance, that is the relationship between the strength of the
conscious application of corporate social responsibility principles, and the
strength of stakeholders’ value and the dynamics of their
migration processes.
The research and analysis on sustainable business models of companies in terms of activity on the
capital market resulted in the following conclusions:
Companies should choose one of nine strategic options, the most appropriate to their current
business context, depending on, inter alia, resources available, their relationships with stakeholders
and their structure, the life cycle of the company, their location in the sector, and competitive, economic
and intellectual strength:
– The A-A strategic option is most appropriate for joint-stock companies that operate in the
securities market. The joint implementation of corporate social responsibility and value-based
management concepts, including compliance with the rules of corporate governance and the
skillful interaction of key actors creating business, results in satisfying the requirements of
the capital market as regards fulfilling the needs of shareholders and ensuring the company’s
business security.
– The A-B strategic option is most appropriate for creative businesses operating, for example, in
high technology sectors. These companies create value in a responsible way through the dynamic
development of intellectual capital, possessing financial capital at the same time.
– The A-C strategic option is most appropriate for companies that operate in sectors where
stakeholders strongly influence the market and products or services have an economic and
social dimension (e.g., energy, public utility, water and sewage, or service sectors based on
creating value for retail customers). Combining the principles of corporate social responsibility
and value-based management with the strength of stakeholders can create new instruments for
building competitive advantage while exchanging values and creating various kinds of values.
– The B-A strategic option is the most appropriate for joint-stock companies operating in the
securities market whose products and services have an economic and social dimension, and the
creation of value proposition through products and services requires strong cooperation, alliances
or presence in the network structures. Symbiosis between all significant stakeholders and mutual
reinforcement of their value while applying the principles of corporate governance can ensure
the stability of the business, strengthen its brand value, its reputation and the positive image of
the company on the market.
– The B-B strategic option is the most appropriate for companies that offer products and/or services
rich in knowledge, the reception of which has a strong social dimension. Combining stakeholders’
value with the company’s economic and intellectual dimension can be a highly effective resource
in achieving dynamic financial performance, taking into account the experience curve.
69
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
– The B-C strategic option is most appropriate for business and social enterprises which strongly
influence society and its behavior. This is the most extensive model, as it applies not only to capital
companies (operating in the capital market and outside), but also to non-profit and not-for-profit
organizations. Orienting the strategy to fulfilling the needs of stakeholders is associated with
the concept of social entrepreneurship, where value has not only a financial dimension (financial
dividend), but also a social one (social dividend).
– The C-A strategic option is most appropriate for companies operating in relatively stable sectors
of the economy, where the market growth rate is not high. By using creative comparison, the
company may try to match its internal potential to relevant market expectations, following the
principles of economic sustainability. Companies applying an evolutionary model in management
can develop in a sustainable way and maintain their ability to effectively and efficiently manage
business and social risk.
– The C-B strategic option is most appropriate for stable companies that create products and/or
services rich in knowledge, based on the mechanisms of incremental innovation. They modify the
products and/or services they offer, based on the continuous study of customer needs, market
observations, flexibility and changes in the area—the inside of a company—the market.
– The C-C strategic option is most appropriate for companies operating in a stable market with
the clearly defined, changing needs of customers and other stakeholders in a sustainable way.
Stakeholders appreciate the stable state of the company operating in a stable market and seek to
join the course of mutual value exchange. As a result, the value of the company increases, as well
as the value of its stakeholders.
The above strategic options show the trends in the creation of sustainable business models for
companies at the maturity stage of development.
9. Discussion
The assumptions of sustainability are achievable through the entire life cycle of the
company—from the stage of incubation to maturity. Discussion of the results in terms of contribution
to sustainability in the life cycle requires defining at least two extreme stages, the early stage of
company development and the maturity stage. At each stage, the assumptions of the base business
model will be different. In each case, survival in different conditions, which is a prerequisite for
long-term value creation for different groups of stakeholders, should be a key stimulator of business
activity. The configuration design and its monitoring of the survival strategy of business models
at an early stage of development and business models operating in the market for a long time is
the underlying assumption of creating value in the long term. The business model must change
due to the changeable internal and external environment based on the capabilities inherent in its
potential. Skillfully making changes to the business model during its life cycle enables it to survive.
Therefore, survival is determined by the ability to modify the business model throughout the life cycle
of the company, applying the solution appropriate for the situation in the sphere of business models.
We believe that the concept of sustainability, which is based on configuring the business model in
terms of its variability in the context of the company’s life cycle, is subject to interpretation. Both
young and mature companies want, first of all, to be able to survive to create maximum value for
stakeholders in good times. The pillars of survival will be generally the same, even though they will
be different at each stage. Whether a model is sustainable depends on the ability to reconfigure the
business models at different stages of development. A sustainable business model, by the criterion
of the company’s life cycle, is understood as the development of a model configuration such that it
will allow the company to survive on the market under all circumstances. Such logic implies that, at
various stages of the company’s life cycle, managers are able to configure their business models with
business model components adequate for meeting the needs of the market. The resulting business
model canvas will continue to evolve by changing the components that have been fully exploited
70
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
and replacing them with those that will be able to further create company value and achieve high
performance. As a result, the company still has an efficient business model. That efficiency translates
into achieving appropriate rates of return from the business model. The accepted methodology of
business model development will then be realized.
As a result, further research and work on application should be a contribution to creating other
solutions in this respect. It is also interesting to examine this issue from the point of view of the
network economy. In this way, a new approach to business models has been presented, which should
contribute to the development of the sustainability issue from the point of view of the company’s
life cycle.
10. Conclusions
The functioning of companies in the Polish capital market in times of crisis determines new
mechanisms not only of competing, but mainly of developing rules of conducting business. Companies
which are at various stages of development and at different stages of functioning in their sector must
design business models that can provide a platform for stability of the defined and used components,
constituting an efficient business model. In order to be able to do it, they should make strategic
decisions relevant to the life cycle they are in. Only such a design of the business model and strategy
that is consistent with a given stage of company development may ensure an acceptable level of growth
and development of the company, providing the basis for managing and maintaining its continuity
over a long period of time, using sustainability principles. The assessment of business models can take
into account the following factors:
– developed in other stages of the company life cycle
– requiring other methods and management concepts appropriate to the level of company maturity,
supporting the process of value creation
– if the company is a participant in the capital market it may be listed in other indices (a company
at the initial stage of its development in the New Connect Index, for example, and a mature
company in the Respect Index)
– an emphasis on the creation of value in the short and long term
– an emphasis on the creation of value mainly for shareholders and/or the concept of value creation
for the company through a dialogue with stakeholders as the conditions of implementing the
principles of sustainability
Research included both companies at an early stage of development and mature companies.
The data of companies listed on the Stock Exchange in Warsaw in the indices relevant to their specific
character were used. Using the theoretical assumptions related to the concept of the component
approach to building the business model configuration of companies at an early stage of development
and stakeholder theory and the joint use of the CSR and VBM concepts for mature companies, two
models have been developed relating to two extreme stages of development, the stage of shaping the
business model for the objective of developing the company’s ability to create value for shareholders
and the stage of ensuring the long-term value of the company in the case of mature companies. In this
way, individual attributes and their combinations for business models that are at two extreme stages of
development have been identified. The first group of the surveyed companies was IPO companies,
while the second was companies that had been listed on the Stock Exchange for a long time and that
are governed by the principles of corporate governance. Thus, their business models are different.
As shown in this paper, managers in start-ups focus their attention on designing, delivering scalability
and dynamically adjusting the used business model, while in the case of mature companies they
expand the understanding of the business model, adding management intentions to its attributes
based on balancing the interests of different groups of stakeholders and a coherent and coordinated
use of assumptions of the concepts of value-based management and corporate social responsibility,
resulting in the creation of a sustainable business model. Business models examined using the criterion
71
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
of the life cycle change due to the growing needs of stakeholders over time. As these needs and
expectations are the greatest in the case of mature companies, the creation of a category of a business
model concentrated on sustainability is therefore justified. In the case of companies at an early
stage of development, it is also important to take into account which business model components
are responsible for increasing shareholder value to the greatest extent. They should therefore be a
driver of adjusting business models, and changes aiming to build company value should focus on
them. Directions for further research may include the further development of the concept of business
models of the early and mature stages of company development; mechanisms for creating, delivering
and capturing value at various stages of the life cycle of the company; shaping networked business
models in the life cycle; and the methods of achieving business model scalability at various stages of
company development.
Prospects for further scientific research may include:
(1) The further development of the concept of a business model in the life cycle from the point of
view of its sustainability.
(2) Building sustainable business models based on the network paradigm.
(3) Making changes in the configuration of business models on different levels of development.
(4) Studying the scalability of sustainable business models in hybrid organizations.
(5) Searching the impact of cooperative behaviors in building business models.
Several issues limiting research and analysis have been selected. The subject of studying business
models in their life cycle is relatively new and not fully developed. Therefore, there are not many
comparable studies that may provide a reference point for the research findings. There are a small
number of scientific studies on business models examined in terms of the life cycle, which also makes
it difficult to explore this issue. The limitations can also include problems resulting from the research
sampling. The authors intend to develop the research issue and conduct further research on the subject
for different groups of companies, not only capital market participants.
Author Contributions: Adam Jabło ´ nski and Marek Jabło ´ nski contributed equally to the research design, data
collection and the composition of the paper.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Teece, D.J. Business models, business strategy and innovation. Long Range Plan. 2010, 43, 172–194. [CrossRef]
2. Jabło ´ nski, M. Kształtowanie Modeli Biznesu w Procesie KreacjiWarto´sci Przedsi˛ebiorstw (Designing Business Models
in the Process of Company Value Creation); Difin: Warszawa, Poland, 2013. (In Polish)
3. Jabło ´ nski, A. Modele Zrównowa˙zonego Biznesu w Budowie Długoterminowej Warto´sci Przedsi˛ebiorstw z
Uwzgl˛ednieniem ich Społecznej Odpowiedzialno´sci (Sustainable Business Models in Building Long-Term Value,
Taking Their Corporate Social Responsibility into Account); Difin: Warszawa, Poland, 2013. (In Polish)
4. Von Bertalanffy, L. General System Theory; George Braziller: New York, NY, USA, 1969.
5. Boulding, K.E. Economic Analysis; Harper and Row: New York, NY, USA, 1966; Volume 1.
6. Ackoff, R.L. Towards a system of systems concept. Manag. Sci. 1971, 17, 661–671. [CrossRef]
7. Rumelt, R.P. How much does industry matter? Strateg. Manag. J. 1991, 12, 167–185. [CrossRef]
8. Penrose, E.T. The Theory of the Growth of the Firm; Wiley: New York, NY, USA, 1959.
9. Barney, J.B. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. J. Manag. 1991, 17, 99–120. [CrossRef]
10. Barney, J.B. Is the resource-based “view” a useful perspective for strategic management research? Yes.
Acad. Manag. Rev. 2001, 26, 41–56.
11. Barney, J.B.; Clark, D.N. Resource-Based Theory: Creating And Sustaining Competitive Advantage;
Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2007.
12. Peteraff, M. The cornerstones of competitive advantage: A resource-based view. Strateg. Manag. J. 1993, 14,
179–191. [CrossRef]
13. Wernerfelt, B. A resource-based view of the firm. Strateg. Manag. J. 1984, 5, 171–180. [CrossRef]
72
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
14. Dollinger, M.J. Entrepreneurship. Strategies and Resources; Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2001.
15. Prahalad, C.K.; Hamel, G. The Core Competence of the Corporation. Harv. Bus. Rev. 1990, 18, 79–91.
16. Elkington, J. Cannibals with Forks: The Triple Bottom Line of Twenty-First Century Business; Capstone: Mankato,
MN, USA, 1997.
17. Dyllick, T.; Muff, K. Clarifying the meaning of sustainable business: Introducing a typology from
business-as-usual to true business sustainability. Organ. Environ. 2015. [CrossRef]
18. Stubbs, W.; Cocklin, C. Conceptualizing a “sustainability business model”. Organ. Environ. 2008, 21.
[CrossRef]
19. Schaltegger, S.; Burritt, R. Business cases and corporate engagement with sustainability: Differentiating
ethical motivations. J. Bus. Ethics 2015. [CrossRef]
20. Dyllick, T.; Hockerts, K. Beyond the business case for corporate sustainability. Bus. Strateg. Environ. 2002, 11,
130–141. [CrossRef]
21. Mc Donough, W.; Braugnart, M. The Next Industrial Revolution; The Atlantic Monthly: Washington, DC, USA, 1998.
22. Boons, F.; Lüdeke-Freund, F. Business models for sustainable innovation: State-of-the-art and steps towards
a research agenda. J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 45, 9–19. [CrossRef]
23. Carroll, A.; Shabana, K. The business case for corporate social responsibility: A review of concepts, research
and practice. Int. J. Manag. Rev. 2010, 12, 85–105. [CrossRef]
24. Schaltegger, S.; Burritt, R. Corporate sustainability. In The International Yearbook of Environmental and Resource
Economics. 2005/2006: A Survey of Current Issues; Folmer, H., Tietenberg, T., Eds.; Edward Elgar: Cheltenham,
UK, 2005; pp. 185–222.
25. Boons, F.; Montalvo, C.; Quist, J.; Wagner, M. Sustainable innovation, business models and economic
performance: An overview. J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 45, 1–8. [CrossRef]
26. Schaltegger, S.; Lüdeke-Freund, F.; Hansen, E. Business cases for sustainability: The role of business model
innovation for corporate sustainability. Int. J. Innov. Sustain. 2012, 6, 95–119. [CrossRef]
27. York, J.G. Pragmatic sustainability: Translating environmental ethics into competitive advantage.
J. Bus. Ethics 2009. [CrossRef]
28. Schaltegger, S.; Hansen, E.; Lüdeke-Freund, F. Business models for sustainability: Origins, present research,
and future avenues. Organ. Environ. 2015. [CrossRef]
29. Dentchev, N.; Baumgartner, R.; Dieleman, H.; Jóhannsdóttir, L.; Jonker, J.; Nyberg, T.; Rauter, R.; Rosano, M.;
Snihur, Y.; Tang, X.; et al. Embracing the variety of sustainable business models: Social entrepreneurship,
corporate intrapreneurship, creativity, innovation, and other approaches to sustainability challenges.
J. Clean. Prod. 2015. [CrossRef]
30. Bocken, N.M.P.; Short, S.W.; Rana, P.; Evans, S. A literature and practice review to develop sustainable
business model archetypes. J. Clean. Prod. 2014, 65, 42–56. [CrossRef]
31. Amit, R.; Zott, C. Value creation in e-business. Strateg. Manag. J. 2001, 22, 493–520. [CrossRef]
32. Casadesus-Masanell, R.; Ricart, J.E. From strategy to business models and onto tactics. Long Range Plan.
2010, 43, 195–215. [CrossRef]
33. Demil, B.; Lecocq, X. Business model evolution: In search of dynamic consistency. Long Range Plan. 2010, 43,
227–246. [CrossRef]
34. Mahadevan, B. Business models for internet-based ecommerce: An anatomy. Calif. Manag. Rev. 2000, 42,
55–69. [CrossRef]
35. Chesbrough, H. Business model innovation: Opportunities and barriers. Long Range Plan. 2010, 43, 354–363.
[CrossRef]
36. Fielt, E. Conceptualising business models: Definitions, frameworks and classifications. J. Bus. Models 2013, 1,
85–105.
37. Chandler, A. Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of Industrial Enterprise; Doubleday: New York, NY,
USA, 1962.
38. Patton, A. Stretch your product’s earning years: Top management’s stake in the product life cycle. Manag. Rev.
1959, 48, 9–14.
39. Levitt, T. Exploit the product life cycle. Harv. Bus. Rev. 1965, 43, 81–94.
40. Cox, W.E. Product life cycles as marketing models. J. Bus. 1967, 40, 375–384. [CrossRef]
41. Churchill, N.C.; Lewis, V.L. The five stages of small business growth. Harv. Bus. Rev. 1983, 61, 30–50.
42. Greiner, L. Evolution and revolution as organizations grow. Harv. Bus. Rev. 1972. [CrossRef]
73
Sustainability 2016, 8, 430
43. Hofer, C.W. Toward a contingency theory of business strategy. Acad. Manag. J. 1975, 18, 784–810. [CrossRef]
44. Scott, M.; Bruce, R. Five stages of growth in small business. Long Range Plan. 1987, 20, 45–52. [CrossRef]
45. Quinn, R.E.; Cameron, K. Organizational life cycles and shifting criteria of effectiveness: Some preliminary
evidence. Manag. Sci. 1983, 29, 33–51. [CrossRef]
46. Lester, D.L.; Parnell, J.A.; Carraher, S. Organization life cycle: A five-stage empirical scale. Int. J. Organ. Anal.
2003, 11, 339–354. [CrossRef]
47. Thietart, R.A.; Vivas, R. An empirical investigation of success strategies for businesses along the product life
cycle. Manag. Sci. 1984, 30, 1405–1423. [CrossRef]
48. Schallmo, D.R.A.; Brecht, L. Business model innovation in business-to-business markets—Procedure and
examples. In Proceedings of the 3rd ISPIM Innovation Symposium: Managing the Art of Innovation: Turning
Concepts into Reality, Quebec City, QC, Canada, 12–15 December 2010.
49. De Reuver, M.; Bouwman, H.; MacInnes, I. Business model dynamics: A case survey. J. Theor. Appl. Electron.
Commer. Res. 2009, 4, 1–11. [CrossRef]
50. Rodríguez, B.M.M. A new insight into the valuation of start-ups: Bridging the intellectual capital gap in
venture capital appraisals. Electron. J. Knowl. Manag. 2003, 1, 125–138.
51. Grudzewski, W.M.; Hejduk, I.K.; Sankowska, A.; Wa´ ntuchowicz, M. Sustainability w Biznesie Czyli
Przedsie˛biorstwo Przyszłos´ci, Zmiany Paradygmatów I Koncepcji Zarza˛dzania; Wydawnictwo Poltext: Warszawa,
Poland, 2010.
52. Kidd, C.V. The evolution of sustainability. J. Agric. Environ. Ethics 1992, 5, 1–26. [CrossRef]
53. Svenson, G.; Wood, G.; Callaghan, M. A corporate model of sustainable business practices: An ethical
perspective. J. World Bus. 2010, 45, 336–345. [CrossRef]
54. Ahmed, M.D.; Sundaram, D. Sustainability modelling and reporting: From roadmap to implementation.
Decis. Support Syst. 2012, 53, 611–624. [CrossRef]
55. Jabło ´ nski, A.; Jabło ´ nski, M. Modele biznesu w cyklu ˙ zycia przedsi˛ebiorstwa—Wyzwania strategiczne
(Business models in the company life cycle—Strategic challenges). Prz. Organ. 2013, 9, 17–21. (In Polish)
56. Zott, C.; Amit, R. Business model design: An activity system perspective. Special Issue on Business Models.
Long Range Plan. 2010, 43, 216–226. [CrossRef]
57. Zott, C.; Amit, R.; Massa, L. The business model: Theoretical roots, recent developments, and future research.
Available online: www.iese.edu/research/pdfs/di-0862-e.pdf (accessed on 22 April 2016).
58. Keidal, R.W. The Geometry of Strategy, Concepts for Strategic Management; Routledge Taylor & Francis Group:
New York, NY, USA, 2010.
59. Jabło ´ nski, M. Geometria strategii a procesy kreacji warto´sci przedsi˛ebiorstwa (The Geometry of strategy and
processes of company value creation). Prz. Organ. 2011, 4, 36–41. (In Polish)
60. De Waal, A. Strategic Performance Management, a Managerial and Behavioral Approach; Palgrave Macmillan:
New York. NY, USA, 2007.
61. Shafer, S.M.; Smith, H.I.; Lander, I.C. The power of business models. Bus. Horiz. 2005, 48, 199–207. [CrossRef]
62. Jabło ´ nski, M. Geometria modeli biznesu. Ekon. Organ. Przeds. 2011, 4, 39–47. (In Polish)
63. Rappaport, A. Creating Shareholder Value: The New Standard for Business Performance; Free Press: New York,
NY, USA, 1986.
64. Copeland, T.; Koller, T.; Murrin, J. Valuation: Measuring and Managing the Value of Companies; JohnWiley &
Sons: New York, NY, USA, 1994.
65. Martin, J.D.; Petty, J.W.; Wallace, J.S. Value Based Management with Corporate Social Responsibility;
Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2009.
66. Jabło ´ nski, A. Corporate Social Responsibility in Value Based Management; Wy˙ zsza Szkoła Biznesu: Dabrowa
Górnicza, Poland, 2009.
67. New Connect after One Year, Raport z Dojrzewania (A Maturity Report), Warszawa, Poland, 2008. Available
online: http://www.newconnect.pl/pub/dokumenty_do_pobrania/Raport_NC.pdf (accessed on 22 April 2016).
68. Niedzielska, J. A Guide to 5 Years of New Connect, New Connect.info, Warszawa, Poland, 2012. Available
online: http://www.newconnect.info/przewodnik/przewodnik_zwiastun.pdf (accessed on 22 April 2016).
© 2016 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
74
sustainability
Article
Diversification Models of Sales Activity for Steady
Development of an Enterprise
Nestor Shpak 1, Tamara Kyrylych 1,* and Jolita Greblikait˙e 2,*
1 Department of Management and International Business Undertakings,
Economics and Management Education Research Institute, National University “Lviv Polytechnic”,
Metropolitan Andrey street 3, 79013 Lviv, Ukraine; dida_05@ukr.net
2 Faculty of Economics and Management, Business and Rural Development Management Institute,
Aleksandras Stulginskis University, Studentu str. 11, Akademija, 53361 Kaunas, Lithuania
* Correspondence: povstenkot@mail.ru (T.K.); jolita19@gmail.com (J.G.);
Tel.: +38-666-575-299 (T.K.); +37-061-644-615 (J.G.)
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 10 December 2015; Accepted: 18 April 2016; Published: 21 April 2016
Abstract: The paper substantiates the importance of the optimal directionality choice of sales
activity as one of the main lines of enterprise activity, the functioning of which should be complete,
synchronous and complementary. Diversification is one of the powerful instruments to ensure the
steady development of the sales activity of an enterprise. Three models of sales activity diversification
of an enterprise are developed. The first model is based on unveiling the potential of sales channels
and allows us to show the peculiarities of their use. The second model of the optimal quantitative
distribution of production between sales channels is based on profit maximization. This approach
not only takes into account the evaluation of the prescribed parameters of sales channels, but also
provides the high profitability of each assortment item and of the whole enterprise. The third model
of the optimal distribution of production between sales channels accounts for the experience of
collaboration between the enterprise and sales channels during the past period and ensures the
minimal risk and appropriate profitability for each sales channel. The proposed models are tested
and compared to actual data of the enterprise; the advantages and peculiarities of each model
are discussed.
Keywords: sales activity; diversification; optimal production distribution; sales channels; profitability;
business risk
1. Introduction
Market fluctuations are noticeably observed in modern conditions of uncertainty, disbalance and
disproportions between the expected and actual state of the market. A reaction of enterprises on these
processes is manifested by the adaptation to such conditions, an active search for new instruments
and methods, which allow a company to ensure steady development, to confine the competitive
positions and to reduce exogenous and endogenous risks appearing during the economic activity of
market entities. One of such instruments providing the steady development of an enterprise consists of
diversification, which is directed toward expanding the domain of company operation. Diversification
of sales activity is a process of extended use of innovative tools, mechanisms, methods and models
for achieving marketing goals and determining optimal sales channels and the optimal distribution
of products in each sales channel. Diversification provides an instrument for varying the enterprise
operation and constructive optimal decision-making to improve enterprise conditions.
Today, more and more companies choose multichannel distribution systems; the use of such
systems has increased greatly in recent years [1]. It was emphasized in [2] that the increasing complexity
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393; doi:10.3390/su8040393 75 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
of the competitive environment requires new approaches to stating company strategy and tactics.
Enterprises diversify their sales activities to vary the use of distribution channels and to reduce
a risk of profit deficiency caused by exploiting only a few sales channels or by cooperation with
undisciplined intermediaries.
In this paper, we present three models of sales activity diversification of a company. Section 2
includes a review of existing approaches to the selection of sales channels, the conceptual discussion
and presentation of models. The potential of sales channels and the peculiarities of their use are
discussed in Section 3. The second approach to the optimal quantitative distribution of production
between distribution channels based on profit maximization is considered in Section 4. The third model
of the optimal distribution of production between distribution channels based on risk minimization is
described in Section 5. The proposed models are tested and compared to actual data of the company;
a comparison of predicted income is presented in Section 6. The advantages and peculiarities of each
model are discussed in Section 7. Conclusions are reported in Section 8.
2. Theoretical Framework
The problem of the optimal selection of sales channels has attracted considerable interest of
many researchers. Coughlan et al. [3] discussed the structure, function, framework, development,
maintenance and management of distribution channels to attain significant competitive advantages.
Developing relationships between sales channels and control mechanisms in such channels was
reviewed in [4,5]. Nevin [5] emphasized that to be effective in designing channels, marketing managers
need to understand the alternative mechanisms for controlling the individual channel members.
Different kinds of consumers and their behavior on a market to provide the effective selling distribution
were analyzed in [6,7]. Various aspects of sales channels choice by consumers have also been studied
in [8–10]. Sutton and Klein [11] considered the optimization of marketing instruments to drive
profitable sales channels of an enterprise. They underlined the need of optimizing the performance of
each marketing channel (which channels perform better than others?) and of identifying risks and
critical success factors to hit performance targets. Ingene and Parry [12] analyzed channel performance,
channel strategy and mathematical models of sales channels. Evaluating channel choice, Magrath
and Hardy [13] considered three groups of criteria: efficiency (cost, capacity), effectiveness (coverage,
control, competence) and adaptability (flexibility, vitality). Criteria characterizing producers, markets,
purchasing peculiarities, goods, intermediaries, customers, behavior of sales channels participants,
etc., were examined in [14–18]. Kotler [19] described economical, control and adaptive criteria of
channels’ evaluation. Criteria for selecting and evaluating intermediaries in indirect sales channels
were discussed in [19–21]. Rolnicki [22] provides a comprehensive list of channel member selection
criteria, including reputation, business and managerial stability, financial strength, type of market
coverage, sales competency, etc. Various aspects of the sustainability of distribution channels were
discussed by Dent [23]. Different profit-maximization models for distribution channels were proposed
in [24]. Several examples of using the linear programming methods in management were presented
by Anderson et al. [25]. A game-theoretical approach to modeling distribution channels was used
in [26,27].
At the present time, the problem of selecting the best sales channels and arranging the movement
of goods in them is still investigated incompletely, especially taking into account the specificity of
Ukrainian economic relations. This determines the need of system research ensuring the steady
development of sales activity of enterprises based on diversification principles. Choosing optimal
sales channels, enterprises have to deal with a set of questions and problems. To solve these problems,
the authors have proposed three approaches to the diversification of sales activity of a company.
The presented complex of criteria has been formulated by the authors based on the large amount
of literature on this topic, taking into account the practice of sales activity in Ukraine and previous
authors’ investigations. Three models considered in the paper present a new solution of a problem
of sales channels’ selection using the present-day mathematical technique. The mathematical tools
76
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
are known in the literature, but the authors have implemented and adapted these models to existing
conditions of enterprise functioning and development taking into account special features of proposed
qualitative and quantitative characteristic criteria for comparing direct and indirect sales channels.
The choice of a model depends on the production type, the product life cycle stage, the
goals of an enterprise (maximal profit or minimal risk) and other parameters. The model of
determining the sales channel potential assumes comparing the sales channels based on qualitative and
quantitative characteristic criteria, which reflect the peculiarities of cooperation between a company
and intermediaries or take into account the sales results of individual direct sales channels. The second
model of the optimal quantitative distribution of production between sales channels is based on profit
maximization. This approach not only takes into account the evaluation of the prescribed parameters
of sales channels, but also provides the high profitability of each assortment item and of the whole
enterprise. The third model of the optimal distribution of production between sales channels accounts
for the experience of collaboration between the enterprise and sales channels during the past period
and ensures the minimal risk and appropriate profitability for each sales channel.
3. The Model of Determining the Sales Channel Potential
Based on the research mentioned above, the practice of economic entities and our own study [16],
the qualitative-quantitative criteria were elaborated for evaluating and comparing the direct and
indirect sales channels. The importance of elaborating such criteria was also emphasized by Magrath
and Hardy [13]: “Products or services must be graded, assembled, bundled, converted, augmented,
promoted, displayed, sold, warranted, repaired, transported, and so on. Any channel of distribution
can be compared in terms of its inherent ability to fulfill such functions”.
As an example, Svitovyr, LLC (Lviv, Ukraine), was considered. The characteristic criteria of
comparing direct sales channels are presented in Table 1. We also give recommendations for their
calculation. The obtained criteria will be used to compare the direct channels’ potentials using the
improved radar method (see Figure 1a).
Recommendations for the calculation of the qualitative and quantitative characteristic criteria for
direct channels:
(1) The channel having the largest total production turnover gets 10 points; the points of other
channels are calculated proportionally to the leading channel.
(2) The channel having the largest increase of sales volume gets 10 points; the points of other channels
are calculated proportionally to the leading channel.
(3) The sum of strengths and opportunities positions
The sum of weaknesses and threats positions .The direct channel having the maximum value of
the ratio gets 10 points; the points of other channels are calculated proportionally to the
leading channel.
(4) Independent experts interview top-management representatives of direct sales channels forming
the expert opinion according to a 10-point grading scale.
(5) The direct channel having the lowest markup rate gets 10 points. Points for other channels are
calculated subtracting 0.5 points for every additional 5% of markup rate.
(6) The direct channel having the shortest period of goods delivery from the producer to a consumer
gets 10 points. Points for other channels are calculated subtracting 0.5 points for every
additional day.
(7) A secret shopper evaluates sales personnel according to the 10-point grading scale.
(8) Total population of settlements, where production is presented
Population of Ukraine .
(9) The leading direct channel gets 10 points; the points of other channels are calculated proportionally
to the leading channel.
(10) The number of months in use
The number of months of company existence .
77
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
Table 1. Characteristic criteria of comparing direct sales channels of Svitovyr.
No
Criterion
Weight
Characteristic Criteria for
the Selection of a Direct
Sales Channel
Actual Value of a Characteristic
of a Direct Channel
The Number of Points of Each Sales
Channel (According to a 10-Point Scale)
The Number of Points for Each Sales
Channel Corrected by the Weight
ES IS ES IS ES IS
1 0.20 Year turnover of a sales channel 29,000 UAH 21,000 UAH 10 7.24 2 1.45
2 0.13 Increase of sales volume 5% 3% 10 6 1.3 0.78
3 0.11 Enterprise efficiency index
according to SWOT analysis 1.4 1.1 10 7.86 1.1 0.86
4 0.11 Competence and professionalism
of management personnel - - 7.8 9 0.86 0.99
5 0.10 Markup rate 19% 10% 9 10 0.9 1
6 0.09
Averaged velocity of
commodities circulation from the
producer to a consumer
At once At once 10 10 0.9 0.9
7 0.08
A level of service and a level
of production presentation by
sales personnel
- - 8.4 9.5 0.67 0.76
8 0.08 Territorial coverage 0.22 0.09 2.2 0.9 0.18 0.07
9 0.05
The number of visitors (the
number of customers in
a database)
19,000 visitors 16,000 visitors 10 8.42 0.5 0.42
10 0.05 Using period 1 0.2 10 3 0.5 0.15
Abbreviations: ES, Exhibition Sales; IS, Internet Sales.
78
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
The qualitative and quantitative characteristic criteria of comparing indirect sales channels of
Svitovyr, LLC (Lviv, Ukraine), are presented in Table 2. We briefly characterize these criteria and give
recommendations for their calculation. It should be emphasized that the number of qualitative and
quantitative characteristic criteria for indirect distribution channels should be substantially larger
than that for direct channels, as the manufacturer has less possibilities of control and influence on the
intermediary behavior. The obtained criteria will be used to compare the indirect channels’ potentials
using the improved radar method (see Figure 1b).
(a)􀈱 (b)
Figure 1. Graphical interpretation of the evaluation of direct (a) and indirect (b) sales channels for
Svitovyr using the improved radar method (data from 2014). Nomenclature for Figure 1a: ,,
internet sales; ,, exhibition sales; nomenclature for Figure 1b: ,, specialized hypermarket; ,,
distribution network.
Recommendations for the calculation of qualitative and quantitative characteristic criteria for
indirect channels:
(1) The intermediary having the largest year turnover of the producer production gets 10 points; the
points of other indirect sales channels are calculated proportionally to the leading channel.
(2) Data from the last two years are compared. The intermediary having the largest sales increase
gets 10 points; the points of other indirect sales channels are calculated proportionally to the
leading channel.
(3) The intermediary having the least credit debt gets 10 points. For each additional 1000 UAH,
0.5 points are subtracted.
(4) The direct channel having the maximum value of the ratio gets 10 points; the points of other
indirect sales channels are calculated proportionally to the leading channel.
(5) The intermediary having the largest increase in sales gets 10 points; the points of other sales
channels are calculated proportionally to the leading channel.
(6) The intermediary having no debts during the last year gets 10 point. 0.5 points are subtracted for
each debt month.
(7) Independent experts give the number of points according to a 10-point grading scale.
(8) Total population of settlements, where production is presented
Population of Ukraine .
(9) The indirect sales channel having the lowest markup rate gets 10 points. Points for other channels
are calculated subtracting 0.5 points for every additional 5% of markup rate.
(10) The intermediary having the lowest discount gets 10 points; 0.5 point are subtracted for each
additional percentage.
79
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
(11) Independent experts interview top-management representatives of an indirect sales channel
forming the expert opinion according to a 10-point grading scale.
(12) Independent experts give the number of points according to a 10-point grading scale.
(13) The intermediary having the lowest freight charges gets 10 points; 0.5 point are subtracted for
each additional 1000 UAH.
(14) The intermediary with the largest year turnover gets 10 points; the points of other indirect sales
channels are calculated proportionally to the leading channel.
(15) A secret shopper evaluates sales personnel according to a 10-point grading scale.
(16) The intermediary having the largest frequency of promotions gets 10 points; the points of other
sales channels are calculated proportionally to the leading channel.
(17) The intermediary having the least increase in sales of the analogical production of competitors gets
10 points. The points of other channels are calculated subtracting 0.5 points for each additional
5% increase.
(18) The duration of intermediary activity is compared; the leading indirect channel gets 10 points;
the points of other indirect sales channels are calculated proportionally to the leading channel.
(19) The part of producer’s costs in joint promotions is compared to that of the intermediary. The
channel in which the part of producer’s costs is the lowest gets 10 points; the points of other
indirect sales channels are calculated proportionally to the leading channel.
(20) The intermediary having the shortest period of product delivery from the producer to a consumer
gets 10 points. Points of other channels are calculated subtracting 0.5 points for each
additional day.
(21) Turnover of producer production
Total turnover of the intermediary . The indirect channel having the largest ratio gets 10 points; the
points of other indirect sales channels are calculated proportionally to the leading channel.
(22) The Marketing Department and Sales Department give the number of points according to
a 10-point scale.
(23) Independent experts give the number of points according to a 10-point grading scale.
(24) Independent experts give the number of points according to a 10-point grading scale.
(25) The number of months in use
The number of months of company existence .
(26) The dates of the last investment in fixed assets are compared. The indirect channel with the last
investment gets 10 points. The points of other channels are calculated by subtracting one point
for each year earlier than the leading channel.
(27) The use of ecological modes of transport and the use of rendering plant facilities are estimated.
The indirect channel having at least one of the abovementioned items gets 10 points.
(28) The indirect sales channel having no returns gets 10 points. The points for other channels are
calculated subtracting one point for each return.
(29) Independent experts give the number of points according to a 10-point grading scale.
(30) The number of nonstandard situations solved positively
The number of nonstandard situations .
(31) The dates of the last purchase are compared. The indirect channel with the latest purchase gets
10 points. The points of other channels are calculated subtracting 0.5 points for each month earlier
than the leading channel.
(32) Volumes of the last purchase are compared. The indirect channel with the largest purchase
volume gets 10 points; the points of other indirect sales channels are calculated proportionally to
the leading channel.
80
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
Table 2. Qualitative and quantitative characteristic criteria of comparing indirect sales channels of Svitovyr.
No
Criterion
Weight Characteristic Criteria for the Selection of an Indirect Sales Channel
Actual Value of a Characteristic
of an Indirect Channel
Points
(According to a
10-Point Scale)
The Number of Points
Corrected by theWeight
SH DN SH DN SH DN
1 0.11 Year turnover of a sales channel 16,200 UAH 19,100 UAH 7.5 10 0.825 1.1
2 0.07 Increase of sales volume of producer production 14% 12% 10 8.6 0.7 0.602
3 0.05 The quantity of credit debt 1000 UAH 2200 UAH 10 9.4 0.5 0.47
4 0.05 Enterprise efficiency index according to SWOT analysis 0.95 0.7 10 7.4 0.5 0.37
5 0.05 Increase of total sales volume 6% 3% 10 5 0.5 0.25
6 0.05 Exact time payment for shipped production 3 months 2 months 8.5 9 0.425 0.45
7 0.05 Consistency between a target consumer of the intermediary and the producer - - 8 7 0.4 0.35
8 0.05 Territorial coverage 0.22 0.32 2.2 3.2 0.11 0.16
9 0.04 Markup rate 29% 32% 10 9.8 0.4 0.392
10 0.04 Discount for production 6% 8% 10 9 0.4 0.36
11 0.04 Competence and professionalism of management personnel - - 9 7 0.36 0.28
12 0.04 Existence and quality of marketing strategy - - 5 6 0.2 0.24
13 0.03 Freight charges 7500 UAH 8000 UAH 10 9.8 0.3 0.294
14 0.03 Total year turnover of the indirect channel 144,000 UAH 153,000 UAH 9.4 10 0.282 0.3
15 0.03 A level of service and a level of production presentation by sales personnel - - 8 5 0.24 0.15
16 0.02 Frequency of joint promotions 2 times a year 2 times a year 10 10 0.2 0.2
17 0.02 Increase in sales of the analogical production of competitors 11% 17% 10 9.4 0.2 0.188
18 0.02 Duration of intermediary activity 1.9 year 1.4 year 10 7.4 0.2 0.148
19 0.02 Participation in joint promotions 26% 41% 10 6.3 0.2 0.126
20 0.02 Averaged velocity of goods circulation from the manufacturer to a consumer 3 days 2 days 9.5 10 0.19 0.2
21 0.02 A part of the turnover of producer production in the total turnover of the indirect channel 0.11 0.12 9.2 10 0.184 0.2
22 0.02 Elasticity in decision-making - - 8 6 0.16 0.12
23 0.02 Quality of promotions - - 7 9 0.14 0.18
24 0.02 Existence and quality of the review of branch markets for a channel - - 7 6 0.14 0.12
25 0.02 Using period 0.3 0.3 3 3 0.06 0.06
26 0.01 Date of the last investment in fixed assets 2010 2010 10 10 0.1 0.1
27 0.01 Ecological compatibility of commodity circulation - - 10 10 0.1 0.1
28 0.01 Merchandise returns - 2007 10 9 0.1 0.09
29 0.01 Image, professionalism and reputation - - 10 8 0.1 0.08
30 0.01 Elasticity and accommodation of sales channel personnel to nonstandard situations 0.7 0.9 7 9 0.07 0.09
31 0.01 Date of the last purchase 8 July 2013 5 October 2013 7 10 0.07 0.1
32 0.01 The last purchase volume 100 items 110 items 9.1 10 0.091 0.1
Abbreviations: SH, Specialized Hypermarket; DN, Distribution Network.
81
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
On the basis of the described criteria, the direct and indirect channels’ potentials will be compared.
The existing radar method [28,29], which does not account for the criterion weights, involves building
a circle with a radius equal to 10 conventional units. Next, a graphical cyclogram is constructed at
the radial axis at which the criteria values are marked. These marks are connected creating a polygon
(the number of axes is equal to the number of criteria). The proposed improved radar method [16]
consists of building a circle with a radius equal to the maximum value of all of the criteria, sorting
the criteria into groups according to the weight decrease and according to points adjusted by the
weight coefficient. It should be mentioned that the recommended values of criteria weights reflect
their significance and are set based on the experience of enterprise activity. At the radial axis of the
graphical cyclogram, the criteria values corrected by their weights are marked. The area S˚
p of the
obtained polygon is determined as follows:
S˚
p
“ sin
` 2π
n
˘
pa1 ˆγ1 ˆ a2 ˆγ2 ` a2 ˆγ2 ˆ a3 ˆγ3 ` a3 ˆγ3 ˆ a4 ˆγ4 `...`
`an´1 ˆγn´1 ˆ an ˆγn ` an ˆγn ˆ a1 ˆγ1qˆ 0.5
(1)
where n is the number of criteria, αi is the value of the i-th characteristic criterion and γi denotes the
weight coefficient of the i-th criterion.
Comparison of sales channels is carried out using the generalized characteristic index Y˚
k which is
calculated as:
Y˚
k
“
S˚
p
S˚
c
(2)
In this equation, S˚
c is the area of a circle with a radius equal to the maximal value of all of the
weighted criteria (r “ max pai ˚ γiq). The greater is the value of Y˚
k , the more profitable is the sales
channel (see Figure 1).
Based on graphical evaluation of the direct and indirect sales channels of Svitovyr, using
the improved radar method, the correspondence between the actual and reference values of the
characteristics of sales channels are presented in Table 3.
The analysis of the obtained results for Svitovyr allows us to conclude that exhibition sales has
the largest potential among the direct sales channels, as its level of correspondence between the actual
and reference values of the characteristics is equal to 0.125. According to this model, specialized
hypermarket has the largest potential among the indirect sales channels, as its level of correspondence
between the actual and reference values of the characteristics is equal to 0.067.
The recommended percentage of production distribution between the direct sales channels
calculated on the basis of generalized characteristic indices is the following: 55% for exhibition
sales and 45% for internet sales; whereas the recommended percentage of production distribution
between the indirect sales channels is the following: 67% for specialized hypermarket and 33% for
distribution network.
Actual values of income per unit and actual sales volumes of three-phase and single-phase
transformers for direct and indirect distribution channels of Svitovyr, LLC (Lviv, Ukraine), are
presented in Table 4.
The recommended sales volumes for the three-phase and single-phase transformers obtained on
the basis of the considered model are shown in Table 5.
82
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
Table 3. The results of evaluation of direct and indirect sales channels for Svitovyr using the improved radar method (data from 2014).
The Names of Parameters Types of Sales Channels Parameter
Values
Reference saturation of the characteristics of the sales channel, S˚
c
Direct channels
Exhibition Sales 6.602
Internet Sales 12.56
Actual saturation of the characteristics of the sales channel, S˚
p
Exhibition Sales 0.821
Internet Sales 1.266
A level of correspondence between the actual and reference values of
the characteristics (the generalized characteristic index), Y˚dir
k j , j “ 1, 2
Exhibition Sales 0.125
Internet Sales 0.101
Reference saturation of the characteristics of the sales channels, S˚
c
Indirect channels
Specialized Hypermarket 2.137
Distribution Network 3.799
Actual saturation of the characteristics of the sales channel, S˚
p
Specialized Hypermarket 0.143
Distribution Network 0.124
A level of correspondence between the actual and reference values of
the characteristics (the generalized characteristic index), Y˚indir
k j , j “ 3, 4
Specialized Hypermarket 0.067
Distribution Network 0.033
Table 4. The values of income per unit and actual sales volumes of direct and indirect sales channels of Svitovyr in 2014.
Production Items Parameters
Sales Channels Exhibition Sales Internet Sales Specialized Hypermarket Distribution Network
Three-phase
transformer
Income per unit 164.35 140.20 153.90 115.78
Actual annual sales volume, Q1j, j “ 1; 4 1890 2050 1820 3290
Single-phase
transformer
Income per unit 161.13 152.46 166.71 101.42
Actual annual sales volume, Q2j, j “ 1; 4 1680 1658 1403 1779
83
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
Table 5. The recommended sales volumes of direct and indirect sales channels of Svitovyr in 2014
following from the model of determining the sales channels’ potential.
Production
Items Sales Volumes
Sales Channels Exhibition
Sales
Internet
Sales
Specialized
Hypermarket
Distribution
Network
Three-phase
transformer
Recommended annual sales
volume, Q1j, j “ 1; 4 2167 1773 3424 1686
Single-phase
transformer
Recommended annual sales
volume, Q2j, j “ 1; 4 1836 1502 2132 1050
The actual annual income of Svitovyr from sales of two types of transformers is 2,196,843 UAH;
after redistribution of production between sales channels, it will be 2,313,626 UAH, i.e., it will be larger
by 116,783 UAH or by 5.32%. The advantage of such a redistribution for the three-phase transformer
will be also discussed in Section 6. It should be mentioned that the model of determining the sales
channels’ potential does not assume the redistribution of the product from direct channels to indirect
and vice versa. The models discussed below allow such a redistribution.
4. The Model of the Optimal Distribution of Production between Sales Channels Based on
Profit Maximization
The model of determining the sales channel potential described in the previous section can be
used for further investigation of sales activity diversification of an enterprise. The results obtained for
the generalized characteristic indices will be used to formulate the constraints in the linear optimization
problem discussed in this section. The objective function of the optimal distribution of production
between sales channels should guarantee the maximal profit:
mÿ
i“1
ÿn
j“1
Gij “
mÿ
i“1
ÿn
j“1
rPij ˆ
p100´γjq
100
´pSi `Wij `Uij ` Aij ` Cijqsˆ Qij Ñ max (3)
where:
Gij is the profit for the i-th assortment item using the j-th sales channel;
Pij is the price of the production unit for the i-th assortment item with the use of the j-th sales channel;
γi denotes the discount for the intermediary when the j-th sales channel is used, %;
Si is the prime cost of the i-th assortment item;
Wij are the costs of warranty repair and guarantee maintenance of the production unit guarantee for
the i-th assortment item when the j-th sales channel is used;
Uij stands for expected logistics costs per i-th output unit with the use of the j-th sales channel;
Aij are the administrative costs for the i-th assortment item when the j-th sales channel is used;
Cij denotes the stimulation costs of intermediary for the i-th assortment item in the j-th sales channel;
Qij is the production volume of the i-th assortment item when the j-th sales channel is used;
m is the number of assortment items;
n is the number of sales channels.
Now, we formulate a system of constraints of the linear optimization problem:
(1). In the proposed optimization model, the planned output volume of every assortment item
is equal to or less than the initial output one Wbeg
i as its increase leads to the corresponding cost
increase. Hence:
ÿn
j“1
Qij ď Wbeg
i , i “ 1,m (4)
84
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
(2). Expert interview of sales channels managers of Svitovyr has shown that the channels will
continue the collaboration with this enterprise under conservation of at least 25% of actual sales
volume. Such a constraint is written as:
Qij ě 0, 25ˆUbeg
ij , i “ 1,m; j “ 1, n (5)
where Ubeg
ij is the actual sales of the i-th assortment item in the j-th sales channel.
(3). To take into account the potential of each direct and indirect sales channel, we use the results
of their evaluation obtained in Section 2 by the improved radar method, which allows us to calculate
the profitability of each channel. Mathematically, this constraint has the following form:
mÿ
i“1
Qij “ λj
mÿ
i“1
αÿ
j“1
Qij, j “ 1, α,
αÿ
j“1
λj “ 1 (6)
λj “
Y˚dir
k j
αř
j“1
Y˚dir
k j
, j “ 1, α (7)
where λj is the ratio of the generalized characteristic index Y˚dir
k of the direct sales channel (see
Equations (2) and (7)); α is the number of direct channels.
Similarly, for indirect sales channels, we have:
mÿ
i“1
Qij “ μj
mÿ
i“1
ÿn
j“α`1
Qij, j “ α `1, n,
ÿn
j“α`1
μj “ 1 (8)
μj “
Y˚indir
k j
řn
j“α`1
Y˚indir
k j
, j “ α `1, n (9)
where μj is the ratio of the generalized characteristic index Y˚indir
k .
(4). The standard constraint of the optimization problems of such a type is the requirement of the
non-negativity of sales volumes:
Qij ą 0 (10)
Actual data necessary for formulating and solving the corresponding optimization problem for
direct and indirect sales channels of Svitovyr can be found in Table 4. Based on these data, the objective
function is stated as:
164.35ˆ Q11 `140.20ˆ Q12 `153.90ˆ Q13 `115.78ˆ Q14 `161.13ˆ Q21
`152.46ˆ Q22 `166.71ˆ Q23 `101.42ˆ Q24 Ñ max
(11)
The constraints are the following:
Q11 ` Q12 ` Q13 ` Q14 ď 9050, (12a)
Q21 ` Q22 ` Q23 ` Q24 ď 6520, (12b)
Q11 ` Q21 “ 0.45 ˆpQ11 ` Q12 ` Q21 ` Q22q, (12c)
Q13 ` Q23 “ 0.33 ˆpQ13 ` Q14 ` Q23 ` Q24q , (12d)
Q11 ě 473, (12e)
Q12 ě 513, (12f)
85
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
Q13 ě 455, (12g)
Q14 ě 823, (12h)
Q21 ě 420, (12i)
Q22 ě 415, (12j)
Q23 ě 351, (12k)
Q24 ě 445. (12l)
The solution of the optimization problem Equations (11) and (12) ensuring profit maximization
was obtained using the simplex method realized by the computer program [30]. The solution results
are presented in Table 6.
Table 6. The values of optimal sales volumes of direct and indirect sales channels of Svitovyr obtained
in the profit maximization model.
Production
Items Parameters
Sales Channels Exhibition
Sales
Internet
Sales
Specialized
Hypermarket
Distribution
Network
Three-phase
transformer
Optimal annual sales volume,
Q˚
1j, j “ 1; 4 5487 1916 455 1192
Single-phase
transformer
Optimal annual sales volume,
Q˚
2j, j “ 1; 4 420 5304 351 445
The actual annual income of Svitovyr from two analyzed types of transformers is 2,196,843 UAH;
after optimization, it will be 2,358,439 UAH. The proposed redistribution of production between the
sales channels allows the enterprise to raise the annual income by 161,596 UAH, i.e., by 7.35%.
5. The Model of the Optimal Distribution of Production between Sales Channels Based on
Risk Minimization
The model considered in the previous section takes into account only the last annual income, but it
is worthwhile to account for annual incomes for several previous years, as the experience of preceding
years may be essential for decision-making. Every enterprise tends to maximize its income, but there
appears the admissible risk that the company owner is ready to incur. According to [31,32], risk is
incorporated into different types of decision models, and there are different types of risk management
strategies: risk sharing, risk pooling and risk diversification. Some enterprises are of the opinion that
it is better to restrict slightly their income to a certain level, but to minimize their risks (“safety first”
objectives [31,32]).
In this section, we investigate the diversification of marketing activity from the viewpoint of
minimal risk and formulate the new model of the optimal distribution of product between the sales
channels based on risk minimization. Steady development of an enterprise is also possible under
the use of such a strategy. The solution of the formulated problem can be obtained by adapting
Markowitz’s portfolio theory [33,34] to risk estimation under conditions of using the specified sales
channels. This approach allows us not only to compare the sales channels from the viewpoint of their
profitability, but also to investigate their risk level.
To illuminate the proposed approach, we present the information of Svitovyr about the
profitability of three-phase transformer (Table 7) and single-phase transformer (Table 8) in direct
(exhibition sales, internet sales) and indirect (specialized hypermarket, distribution network) sales
channels during 2010–2014.
The use of Markowitz’s portfolio theory for the investigation of the optimal integration of
sales channels based on risk minimization is motivated by its origin approach to the mathematical
formulation of the relation between profitability and risk.
86
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
Table 7. The values of profit per production unit (UAH) for the three-phase transformer in the sales
channels of Svitovyr.
Years
Sales Channels Exhibition
Sales
Internet
Sales
Specialized
Hypermarket
Distribution
Network
2010 107.90 100.20 102.00 101.70
2011 134.02 102.70 130.90 114.81
2012 165.72 128.16 145.45 154.47
2013 172.13 135.50 147.98 145.80
2014 164.35 140.20 153.90 115.78
The mean profit value per
production unit during 2010–2014 148.82 121.35 136.05 126.51
Table 8. The values of profit per production unit (UAH) for the single-phase transformer in the sales
channels of Svitovyr.
Years
Sales Channels Exhibition
Sales
Internet
Sales
Specialized
Hypermarket
Distribution
Network
2010 117.50 126.20 127.75 109.00
2011 124.44 162.97 154.22 105.78
2012 132.15 170.16 178.40 129.65
2013 175.27 172.35 187.45 133.80
2014 161.13 152.46 166.71 101.42
The mean profit value per
production unit during 2010–2014 142.10 156.83 162.91 115.93
The general stages of implementation of the optimal production distribution between sales
channels based on risk minimization are the following:
(1) Gathering data about profitability P
pkq
i of the selected assortment item in the i-th sales channel
within the span of some period.
(2) Determining the mean value of profitability ri of every sales channel.
(3) Calculating the covariance between profitability of sales channels:
covpPi, Pjq “ 1
N ´1
Nÿ
k“1
pP
pkq
i
´ riqpP
pkq
j
´ rjq , i “ 1, n , j “ 1, n , (13)
where N is the number of periods (years).
(4) Arranging a symmetric covariance matrix of the profitability of sales channels:
Apcovq “
¨
˚˚˚˝
A11 A12 ... A1n
A21 A22 ... A2n
... ... ... ...
An1 An2 ... Ann
˛
‹‹‹
‚
(14)
where A ij “ covpPi, Pjq.
(5) Finding the inverse matrix A(cov)´1.
(6) Calculating the mean squared deviation based on the percentage relation between the sales
channels. The essence of the considered model of the optimal production distribution between the
sales channels consists of risk minimization. If xi denotes the part of the production distributed
87
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
using the i-th sales channel, then the mean squared deviation, which reflects the risk level of the
sales channel, is written as:
σ “ X ¨Apcovq´1 ¨ XT, (15)
where X is the vector with components xi; XT is the transpose of the vector X; Apcovq´1 denotes the
matrix inverse to the covariance matrix.
The problem formulation, including the objective function and constraints according to the
Markowitz model [35]:
σ “ X ¨Apcovq´1 ¨ XT Ñ min,
řn
i“1
xi “ 1,
xi ě 0, i “ 1, n.
(16)
(7) Solving the optimization problem (finding the optimal production distribution between sales
channels that ensures minimal risk).
We will illustrate the described approach by the study of the profitability of sales channels for
Svitovyr. The necessary input data for the formulation of the optimization problem are presented in
Table 9 for the three-phase transformer.
Table 9. Covariance of profitability of sales channels for Svitovyr (sales of the three-phase transformer).
Sales Channels
Exhibition
Sales
Internet
Sales
Specialized
Hypermarket
Distribution
Network
Covariance
Exhibition Sales 740.9 469.8 545.9 486.0
Internet Sales 469.8 349.3 346.4 251.0
Distribution Network 545.9 346.4 433.8 301.6
Specialized Hypermarket 486.0 251.0 301.6 505.4
The covariance matrix takes the form:
Apcovq “
¨
˚˚˚˝
740.9 469.8 545.9 486.0
469.8 349.3 346.4 251.0
545.9 346.4 433.8 301.6
486.0 251.0 301.6 505.4
˛
‹‹‹
‚
(17)
The inverse matrix is calculated as:
Apcovq´1 “ 1
108
¨
¨
˚˚˚˝ 33.62 ´
14.05 ´
23.01 ´
11.62
´14.05 7.25 8.54 4.81
´23.01 8.54 16.97 7.76
´11.62 4.81 7.76 4.36
˛
‹‹‹
‚
(18)
The objective function of the optimization problems is written as:
σ “ px1, x2, x3, x4q ¨
¨
˚˚˚˝
33.62 ´14.05 ´23.01 ´11.62
´14.05 7.25 8.54 4.81
´23.01 8.54 16.97 7.76
´11.62 4.81 7.76 4.36
˛
‹‹‹
‚
¨
¨
˚˚˚˝
x1
x2
x3
x4
˛
‹‹‹
‚
Ñ min (19)
or:
σ “ 33.62x2
1
´28.10x1x2 ´46.02x1x3 ´23.24x1x4 `7.25x2
2
`
`17.08x2x3 `9.62x2x4 `16.97x2
3
`15.52x3x4 `4.36x2
4
Ñ min.
(20)
88
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
The constraints are the following:
x1 ` x2 ` x3 ` x4 “ 1 (21)
x1 ě 0, x2 ě 0, x3 ě 0, x4 ě 0 (22)
The convexity property of a quadratic form ensures that any local minimum must be a global
minimum. A quadratic optimization problem is convex if and only if the inverse covariance matrix
in the objective function is positively defined, i.e., its eigenvalues are positive. In our case, the
characteristic polynomial of the inverse covariance matrix:
λ4 ´62.20λ3 `171.32λ2 ´73.18λ`3.63 “ 0 (23)
has the following roots:
λ1 “ 0.05707 ą 0, λ2 “ 0.45535 ą 0, λ3 “ 2.35422 ą 0, λ4 “ 59.33336 ą 0 . (24)
Hence, the objective function is positively defined.
The problem is solved using the Lagrange multipliers: to find the minimum of the function:
L “ 33.62x2
1
´28.10x1x2 ´46.02x1x3 ´23.24x1x4 `7.25x2
2
`17.08x2x3`
`9.62x2x4 `16.97x2
3
`15.52x3x4 `4.36x2
4
´ λpx1 ` x2 ` x3 ` x4 ´1q Ñ min.
(25)
The conditions of existence of an extremum read:
BL
Bx1
“ 67.24x1 ´28.10x2 ´46.02x3 ´23.24x4 ´λ “ 0 ,
BL
Bx2
“ ´28.10x1 `14.50x2 `17.08x3 `9.62x4 ´λ “ 0 ,
BL
Bx3
“ ´46.02x1 `17.08x2 `33.94x3 `15.52x4 ´λ “ 0 ,
BL
Bx4
“ ´23.24x1 `9.62x2 `15.52x3 `8.72x4 ´λ “ 0 .
(26)
From system Equation (26), we obtain:
x1 “ 11.14λ, x2 “ 7.12λ, x3 “ 8.14λ, x4 “ 7.48λ (27)
Inserting these values of xi in the constraint Equation (21), we get that λ “ 0.0295; hence, the
optimal production distribution (for the three-phase transformer) between the sales channels of
Svitovyr will be the following:
x1 « 0.33, x2 « 0.21, x3 « 0.24, x4 « 0.22, (28)
i.e., 33% for Exhibition sales, 21% for internet sales, 24% for specialized hypermarket and 22% for
distribution network. Based on data presented in Table 7, a similar optimization problem can be also
solved for the single-phase transformer.
6. Comparison of Predicted Income
Analyzing three models of the diversification of sales activity shows that every model gives the
possibility to optimize the product distribution between sales channels. The owner or top-managers,
which have the right of decision-making, decide about the global strategy of enterprise development
taking into account the peculiarities of the competitive position, the market environment situation, etc.
Table 10 shows the prediction results for sales of the three-phase transformer on the bases of the three
discussed models of distribution channels’ diversification.
89
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
Table 10. Results of the diversification of sales channels for Svitovyr using different models (sales of
the three-phase transformer).
Model
Recommended Sales Volume for Sales Channels
Total Income,
UAH
Exhibition
Sales
Internet
Sales
Specialized
Hypermarket
Distribution
Network
Pieces % Pieces % Pieces % Pieces %
Determining sales
channel potential 2167 24 1773 20 3424 38 1686 18 1,326,880
Optimal production
distribution between
sales channels based
on profit maximization
5487 61 1916 21 455 5 1192 13 1,378,446
Optimal production
distribution between
sales channels based
on risk minimization
2986 33 1901 21 2172 24 1991 22 1,322,058
Actual sales volume
(2014) 1890 21 2050 23 1820 20 3290 36
Actual profitability per 1,259,046
production unit, UAH
(2014)
164.35 140.20 153.90 115.78
As can be seen from the presented calculations, all three models predict the excess of the total
income in comparison with the actual income (by the example of the three-phase transformer); this
testifies that every model can be used. The largest total income is predicted by the model based on
profit maximization, whereas the model based on risk minimization predicts the least total income
(though larger than the actual one). The model of determining sales channels potential predicts that
the product redistribution between sales channels allows the firm to increase the annual income by
67,834 UAH or by 5.39%. According to the model based on profit maximization, the annual income
will increase by 119,400 UAH or by 9.48%. The model of optimal production distribution between sales
channels based on risk minimization forecasts the increase of annual income by 63,012 UAH or by 5%.
7. Verification and Comparison of Models
The model of determining the sales channel potential is a general-purpose tool for all kinds and
types of enterprises (large, medium, small). This model is simple in use, reveals the sales channel
potential, covers a wide spectrum of estimated parameters and takes into account the weight of
each parameter. The use of the model lays down no special technical requirements. The processing
of results is conducted by simple analytical methods using graphical tools (Excel environment or
some analogue). The considered model includes qualitative and quantitative characteristic criteria.
We have proposed the quantitative measurement of qualitative criteria using expert estimation. Such
an estimation assumes that independent experts synthesize information by quantitative evaluation of
a criterion that characterizes the compared sales channels. For example, a level of service and a level of
production presentation by sales personnel is evaluated by a secret shopper according to the 10-point
grading scale. Similarly, the competence and professionalism of management personnel is estimated
on the basis of the interview of top-management representatives according to a 10-point grading scale.
For Svitovyr, LLC (Lviv, Ukraine), such an estimation was carried out in 2014. The shortcoming of this
model consists of the possibility of giving rise to inadequate or “warped” information; the more so as
the data volume required for getting relevant data in each sales channel is sufficiently large. To ensure
a well-grounded and balanced management decision, such studies should be conducted systematically,
in the dynamics, immediately determining undesirable changes in sales channels.
90
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
The model of the optimal distribution of production between sales channels based on profit
maximization ensures the maximal profit of an enterprise by choosing the most profitable sales
channel. The advantages of this model are the following: the accuracy of the obtained results, a high
level of their processing, the possibility of formulating additional constraints according to the needs
and interests of a company, the possibility of comparing current and potential sales channels, the
possibility of changing undisciplined intermediaries and redistributing production into more profitable
direct and indirect sales channels. The shortcomings of the considered model are connected with the
need to have specialists in linear programming, the risk of sales channel “overestimation” and the
failure to take account of dynamic conditions.
The model of the optimal distribution of production between sales channels based on risk
minimization is helpful for enterprises of those countries, the economy of which develops under
indeterminate and chaotic conditions. This model can also be used when the product life cycle is at
an initial stage and when an enterprise tries to enter into a new market where gathering information is
complicated and there is high probability of product “aversion” by customers. The advantages of this
model consist of the balance of risks and profits in the selection of the optimal sales channel and in
elimination of the influence of subjective factors. The shortcomings of this model are connected with
the threat of profit deficiency due to “underestimation” of the future sales channel potential and with
the need of invoking experts-mathematicians to formulate a one-off optimization problem or the need
for employing one’s own specialists in this field.
8. Conclusions
Steady development of an enterprise is ensured by harmonious, synchronous and complementary
realization of all of the directions of company activity. Our paper is devoted to one of such directions:
sales activity. Mathematical modeling provides the tools for the optimal choice of sales channels based
on diversification. Three models of such a choice have been proposed: the model of determining
sales channels’ potential, the model based on profit maximization and the model of the optimal
production distribution between sales channels based on risk minimization. The first model allows us
to throw light on the potential of sales channel, to show the peculiarities of its use and to introduce the
qualitative and quantitative characteristic criteria for comparing direct and indirect sales channels.
To ensure steady development of a company, it is necessary not only to determine the key
parameters of sales channels, but also to provide high profitability of every assortment item, as well
as high profitability of the whole enterprise. The second model solves this problem as a problem of
linear optimization. At the same time, the second model takes into account only current profitability
and does not consider the comparison with the previous periods. This aspect is investigated by the
third model based on accounting for the experience of the previous periods and risk minimization.
The use of every model forecasts larger income than that brought by the current product distribution.
The proposed models can be used by individual enterprises, as well as by consulting companies that
offer facility for analysis and optimization of sales activity.
Author Contributions: All authors contributed equally to this work for drafting the paper, reviewing relevant
studies, compiling and analyzing the data. All authors wrote, reviewed and commented on the manuscript.
All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Kotler, P.; Armstrong, G. Principles of Marketing, 12th ed.; Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2008.
2. Lambin, J.J.; Schuiling, I. Market.-Driven Management: Strategic and Operational Marketing, 3rd ed.; Palgrave
Macmillan: London, UK, 2012.
3. Coughlan, A.T.; Anderson, E.; Stern, L.W.; El-Ansary, A.I. Marketing Channels, 7th ed.; Prentice Hall: Upper
Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2006.
91
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
4. Weitz, B.A.; Jap, S.D. Relationship marketing and distribution channels. J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 1995, 23, 305–320.
[CrossRef]
5. Nevin, J.R. Relationship marketing and distribution channels: Exploring fundamental issues. J. Acad.
Mark. Sci. 1995, 23, 327–334. [CrossRef]
6. Jobber, D.; Lancaster, G. Selling and Sales Management, 8th ed.; Prentice Hall: London, UK, 2009.
7. Trenz, M. Multichannel Commerce: A Consumer Perspective on the Integration of Physical and Electronic Channels;
Springer: Heidelberg, Germany, 2015.
8. Gupta, A.; Su, B.; Walter, Z. Risk profile and consumer shopping behavior in electronic and traditional
channels. Decis. Support. Syst. 2004, 38, 347–367. [CrossRef]
9. Konu¸s, U.; Verhoef, P.C.; Neslin, S.A. Multichannel shopper segments and their covariates. J. Retail. 2008, 84,
398–413. [CrossRef]
10. Verhagen, T.; van Dolen,W. Online purchase intentions: A multi-channel store image perspectives. Inf. Manag.
2009, 46, 77–82. [CrossRef]
11. Sutton, D.; Klein, T. Enterprise Marketing Management: The New Science of Marketing; John Wiley & Sons:
Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2003.
12. Ingene, C.A.; Parry, M.E. Mathematical Models of Distribution Channels; Kluwer Academic Publishers: Boston,
MA, USA, 2005.
13. Magrath, A.J.; Hardy, K.H. Selecting sales and distribution channels. Ind. Mark. Manag. 1987, 16, 273–278.
[CrossRef]
14. Hertsyk, V.A. Distribution Management of Enterprise Production; Volodymyr Dahl East Ukrainian National
University: Luhansk, Ukraine, 2011. (In Ukrainian)
15. Kovalchuk, S.V., Ed.; Marketing Innovations in Economics and Business; Poligrafist-2: Khmelnytskyi, Ukraine,
2013; pp. 1–321. (In Ukrainian)
16. Shpak, N.; Kyrylych, T. Sales channels selection for small industrial enterprises based on qualitativequantitative
characteristic criteria. Int. Quart. J. Econ. Technol. New Technol. Model. Process. 2013, 2, 79–88.
17. Shpak, N.O.; Kyrylych, T. The method of optimal planning of distribution activity for small industrial
enterprises. Econ. State 2014, 4, 15–22. (In Ukraininan)
18. Emrich, C. Multi-Channel Communications- und Marketing-Management; Gabler Verlag: Wiesbaden,
Germany, 2008.
19. Kotler, P. Marketing Management: Millenium, 10th ed.; Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2000.
20. Capon, N.; Capon, R.; Hulbert, J.M. Managing Marketing in the 21st Century: Developing & Implementing the
Market. Strategy; Wessex: Bronxville, NY, USA, 2009.
21. Kotler, P.; Armstrong, G.; Harris, L.C.; Piercy, N. Principles of Marketing, 6th European ed.; Pearson: Harlow,
UK, 2013.
22. Rolnicki, K. Managing Channels of Distribution: The Marketing Executive’s Complete Guide; AMACOM:
New York, NY, USA, 1998.
23. Dent, J. Distribution Channels: Understanding and Managing Channels to Market; Kogan Page: London, UK,
2008.
24. Chen, J.M.; Chen, T.H. The profit-maximization models for a multi-item distribution channel. Transp. Res.
Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 2007, 43, 338–354. [CrossRef]
25. Anderson, D.R.; Sweeney, D.J.; Williams, T.A.; Camm, J.D.; Martin, K. An. Introduction to Management Science:
Quantitative Approaches to Decision Making; South-Western Cengage Learning: Mason, OH, USA, 2011.
26. Park, S.Y.; Keh, H.T. Modelling hybrid distribution channels: A game-theoretical analysis. J. Retail.
Consum. Serv. 2003, 10, 155–167. [CrossRef]
27. Dong, Y.; Shankar, V.; Dresner, M. Efficient replenishment in the distribution channel. J. Retail. 2007, 83,
253–278. [CrossRef]
28. Kuz’min, O.Y.; Chernobay, L.I.; Romanko, O.P. Methods of analysis of the enterprise competitiveness.
Sci. Bull. Ukr. Natl. Forest. Univ. 2011, 21, 159–166. (In Ukrainian)
29. Kalashnik, O.V.; Omelchenko, N.V.; Tovt, V.M. The use of graphical models for evaluating the competitiveness
of goods. Commod. Res. Innov. 2011, 3, 234–241. (In Ukrainian)
30. Library of Practical Software Open Access “Optimizing Resources with Linear Programming”. Available
online: http://www.phpsimplex.com/en/index.htm (accessed on 27 April 2011).
31. Robinson, L.J.; Barry, P.J. The Competitive Firm’s Response to Risk; Macmillan: New York, NY, USA, 1987.
92
Sustainability 2016, 8, 393
32. Tsay, A.A. Risk sensitivity in distribution channel partnerships: Implications for manufacturer return policies.
J. Retail. 2002, 78, 147–160. [CrossRef]
33. Markowitz, H.M. Portfolio Selection. Efficient Diversification of Investments; John Wiley & Sons: New York, NY,
USA, 1959.
34. Fabozzi, F.J.; Markowitz, H.M. The Theory and Practice of Investment Management, 2nd ed.; John Wiley & Sons:
Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2011.
35. Zakharin, S.V. Economic diversification as an efficient mechanism of ensuring enterprise development.
Bull. Kyiv Nat. Univ. Technol. Design 2012, 1, 139–145. (In Ukrainian)
© 2016 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
93
sustainability
Article
Sustainable Process Performance by Application of
Six Sigma Concepts: The Research Study of Two
Industrial Cases
Andrea Sujova *, Lubica Simanova and Katarina Marcinekova
Department of Business Economics, Technical university in Zvolen, T.G.Masaryka 24, 96053 Zvolen, Slovakia;
lubica.simanova@tuzvo.sk (L.S.); xmarcinekovak@is.tuzvo.sk (K.M.)
* Correspondence: sujova@tuzvo.sk; Tel.: +421-45-5206-438; Fax: +421-45-532-811
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 22 December 2015; Accepted: 7 March 2016; Published: 10 March 2016
Abstract: The current approach to business management focuses on increasing the performance of
business processes. To achieve the required processes performance means to ensure the required
quality and capability of processes. The partial aim of this paper is to confirm the positive effects
of the Six Sigma methodology (SSM) on the corporate performance in the Slovak Republic and
an investigation of the dependency of SSM implementation on the certified quality management
system (QMS) as a set-forward condition via a questionnaire survey carried out in Slovak industrial
enterprises. The survey results confirmed the above-mentioned assumptions. The SSM using DMAIC
(Define-Measure-Analyze-Improve-Control) was applied in real conditions of two manufacturing
enterprises with a different level of quality management system. The results of the research study
proved a possibility to implement SSM and to use the same methods in enterprises aside from a
level of QMS. However, more remarkable results were achieved by the enterprise which introduced
QMS. The first application of SSM in enterprises within specific conditions of furniture production
processes can be considered to be a contribution of the research study, as well. The result of the work
is the model including the methodology and the appropriate combination of methods and tools for
assuring the sustainable performance of the business processes.
Keywords: process performance; Six Sigma; sustainable improvement; furniture manufacturing
1. Introduction
Due to the increased pressure of globalization upon the world market, business competitiveness
is currently dependent upon the innovative abilities of companies, not only in the area of products but
also in processes. One modern approach is based on corporate performance measurement by means of
internal process performance measurements. Companies are, therefore, shifting more and more of their
attention from the quality of products to the performance and quality of internal business processes.
The performance of business processes represents achieving the required results in a given process,
and its size is expressed by the difference between the actual and the required results. The performance
of the process is evaluated by comparing actually achieved and required value of the stated index of
the process, which can be the duration of the process, costs for the process, the quality of the process,
added value, the number of skills, and the number of innovations.
To make the required process performance sustainable their capability must be assured, i.e., the
required process quality. Correct decisions play an important role in the quality assurance process
and they shall be based on the situation analysis using appropriate tools and methods of operational
management and quality improvement. The Six Sigma methodology (SSM) is used as the process
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260; doi:10.3390/su8030260 94 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
quality assurance and improvement method, as its implementation has achieved significant cost
reductions, mainly in the machine, automotive, and electric and technical industry.
Successful results in an automotive industry after implementation of the Six Sigma methodology
(SSM) are presented in studies [1–3]. Benefits of using SSM in achieving the required process capabilities
improvement, hence improving the system stability, were presented by Al-Agha et al. [4]. The highly
useful role of Six Sigma for small and medium enterprises was justified by Kaushik et al. [5]. The main
idea of successful leadership to achieve sustainable competitive advantage to ensure the quality of
service by using SSM was reviewed in the paper of Rabeea et al. [6].
Six Sigma has been applied not only in the industrial enterprises but also in the area of the
services, health, and public administration, both in the private and public field, where there is a strong
orientation on the customer, quality, time, and performance [7].
Six Sigma originated in the 1980s as a corporate strategy containing a set of techniques for
improvement of manufacturing processes and the elimination of defects in the Motorola company. The
main goal of the strategy was to minimize the dispersion of the characteristics critical for quality of the
manufactured products and performed processes and setting of the average values approaching the
target values defined by the customers. The application of SSM brought about changes within a short
time, leading to the reduction of defects in the products using the same labor, technology, and design,
while consuming less cost. Thanks to the strategy, Motorola gained the leading position in the area
of the quality and was awarded the Malcom National Quality Award. Many worldwide enterprises
like Toyota, Ford, BMW, Hilti, Shell, General Electric, Honeywell International, Caterpillar, Raytheon,
and Merril Lynch have successfully applied this methodology [4]. General Electric was one of the first
companies adopting the SSM from Motorola and in the three years since introduction they calculated
that the method had saved them $750 million, net, after subtracting all costs, including the cost on
the method.
Based on a case study done by Nilmani and Shidhar in a firm producing automotive components,
the company was able to improve the process yield from 44% to 90% after applying SSM [8]. The
process capability sigma level improved from 2.91 to 4.43 sigma [9]. According to Gibbons, by
applying Six Sigma in a well-known manufacturing company in the United Kingdom, overall
equipment effectiveness improved significantly from 40% to 85% [10]. He also concluded that using the
DMAIC (Define-Measure-Analyze-Improve-Control) approach provided a systematic improvement
and problem-solving process. Moreover, this kind of process improvement approach resulted in a
sustainable and stable process.
Experience of Slovak and Czech enterprises has proven that, for example, processes in
manufacturing companies in the automobile industry with an already established quality assurance
system are at an average level of around 3.5 to 4 sigma. In this case, an improvement in the firm’s
processes by 0.2 sigma represents economic benefits in the amount of 1% of company income.
Six Sigma processes show a proven approach for businesses and organizations to improve their
performance and that sustainability programs are in need of this operational approach and discipline.
Six Sigma helps a business leader design a sustainable program for value creation [11].
Research from several authors, as well as experience from companies, have shown that Six Sigma
provides process performance on a high and sustainable level. The authors of the paper have chosen,
out of all existing concepts, just this one to create a model of sustainable process performance.
The first aim of the work was to prove the positive effects of the Six Sigma concept on the
corporate performance of the enterprises in the Slovak Republic and investigate the dependency of SSM
implementation on the implementation of a quality management system as a set-forward condition.
To meet the purpose, a primary quantitative survey using a questionnaire method was carried out.
The aim resulted from several studies dealing with effects of SSM on corporate performance [12,13]
and investigating the relationship between certified QMS and SSM [14–16]. The results of the studies
were the inspiration behind our research hypotheses.
95
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
The goal of the paper is to introduce the Six Sigma concept in the companies with a different level
of quality management system and find out the effect of the process performance. The result of the
work is a model, including the methodology and the appropriate combination of the methods and
tools for assurance of the sustainable performance of the business processes.
2. Material and Methods
The purpose of this study has arisen by the idea how to ensure sustainable quality and
improvement of production processes. The first step was the study of the theoretical and latest
scientific knowledge. Based on the study, the goal and methodology of the primary research was
stated. The research results led the authors to create the purpose and procedure of the application in
the real conditions of enterprises.
2.1. Literature Review
The name of the “Six Sigma” methodology comes from statistics where σ means standard
deviation. The term “Six Sigma” refers to the ability of highly-capable processes to produce output
within specification. In particular, processes that operate with six sigma quality produce at defect levels
below 3.4 defects per (one) million opportunities [4]. According to [2–6] a Six Sigma is a statistical
measure of process capability, which is equivalent to 99.99966% of good parts.
According to Töpfer et al. [17], Six Sigma has two dimensions which are:
‚ Six Sigma, as project management, with sound statistical foundations and effective quality
management tools, which contain:
- systematic methodology—DMAIC and DMADV (Define-Measure-Analyze-Design-Verify),
- project and process management,
- a set of tools—process analysis for resolving problems, statistics,
- philosophy and quality culture at a zero defect level.
‚ Six Sigma, as a statistical concept for measurement, is based on the principle that there are no
more than 3.4 errors in the process per million chances, whilst taking into account the complexity
of products and processes.
There exist several definitions of Six Sigma, as a concept, which were summarized in the paper by
Simanova [18]. Based on studies of the opinions of individual authors of Six Sigma methodology, we
may state a concordance of opinions that Six Sigma is an approach or system which, by combining
the use of statistical methods, understanding customer requirements, and decreasing the variability
of processes, leads to an improvement in processes and increases their level of perfection which is
expressed by a maximum number of 3.4 faults per million chances.
The literature review of a lean six sigma for the manufacturing industry was provided by
Albliwi et al. [19]. It is based on a review of papers published in the top journals, which resulted
in definitions of limitations and impending factors before starting an implementation process of SSM.
Limitations and impending factors before starting a SSM implementation process were also
presented in [20,21]. According to Kuvvetli et al. a project selection and its scope, quality culture, and
defining and measuring metrics were determined as the top factors that affect success levels of six
sigma projects [20]. The study of Arumugam et al. has shown that technical and social supports jointly
affect the success of Six Sigma implementation [21].
The relationship between certified quality management system and SSM was investigated in the
studies [14–16]. The results of literature review performed by Karthi et al. point to little work carried
out on integrating Six Sigma and ISO 9001 standards. The synergy of implementing ISO 9001 standards
and Six Sigma has been eluding contemporary organizations [14]. The work of Chiarini deals with
differences between requirements of ISO 13053 aimed to standardizing SSM implementation and the
actual practises of companies by implementing Six Sigma [16].
96
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
If we compare the contribution of Six Sigma from various sources [1–6,9,22–25], it is clear that
deployment of this methodology in companies brings increased performance, increased productivity,
increased competitiveness, and growth in market share, whilst retaining loyal customers and obtaining
new, decreased production costs by decreasing the proportion of costs for repairs and disposal of
non-conforming products, new product designs, and, growth in the qualifications and professional
level of employees. The study by Aldowiasan, focusing on Six Sigma performance for non-normal
processes, showed that less variation reduction was required to improve exponentially distributed
processes [26]. Chao-Ton and Chia-Jan classified the benefit of SSM into hard saving involving tangible
outcomes in relation to cost and revenue, and soft savings, involving actual improvements in efficiency,
quality, and cash flow [27].
Six Sigma has two key methodologies: DMAIC and DMADV. DMAIC (Define-Measure-Analyze-
Improve-Control) is used to improve an existing business process, and DMADV (Define-Measure-
Analyze-Design-Verify) is used to create new product or process designs for predictable, defect-free
performance [28].
DMAIC procedure has been described in several studies concerning application of Six Sigma
methodology [1–11]. Steps of DMAIC procedure endeavor to adopt a smarter way of doing things so
as to minimize the occurrence of errors. It emphasizes doing things right the first time, rather than
spending effort on correcting errors [29].
The tools used by this procedure focus on minimizing the general causes of errors, increasing
the quality of process outputs, decreasing operational costs, increasing process performance, and
eliminating faults caused by other factors. It also involves the use of statistical methods, quality
improvement techniques, and the scientific method, as well [30]. The study of Prashar deals with the
use of non-statistical Shainin DOE (Design of Experiments) tools to simplify the quality improvement
initiative and its incorporating within SSM [31]. The suggestion to implement Poka–Yoke technique in
DMAIC phases is the result of the work done by Vinod et al. [32].
The summary of the most often used methods and tools in the methodology Six Sigma with
classification to individual phases of the improvement model DMAIC in accordance with the
recommendation of the authors [1–4,17,27–33] was made. It can be found in Table A1 in Appendix of
this paper.
2.2. Analysis of the Current Situation in Slovak Enterprises—Methodology of the Research
The current situation in the area of process performance management has been analyzed through
primary quantitative research in Slovak enterprises using the questionnaire method. The main research
objective was the analysis of using traditional and modern methods and tools for process performance
management and measurement in Slovak enterprises from selected industrial branches.
In the first step a database of enterprises data has been created. The information sources came
mostly from the Internet databases and Statistical Bureau. The database size comprised 2235 enterprises
from branches of engineering, construction, automotive, and wood-processing industries. By means of
Internet applications an online questionnaire has been created and distributed to 1500 enterprises.
Questionnaire questions were divided into three areas: common characteristics (branch, region,
ownership, number of employees, activity orientation, type of production organization), financial
results (turnover, indicator ROE), and area of internal processes, production, and quality. Questions
concerning internal processes were as follows:
‚ What qualitative level corresponds with implementation of processes in your company?
‚ What level of elaborated process map does your company have?
‚ What methods are used in process management in your company?
‚ What indicators for production process performance measurement are used in your company?
‚ What indicators for evaluation of employee performance in processes are used in your company?
97
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
‚ What internal processes and their indicators are regularly measured and evaluated in
your company?
‚ What certification of quality management system has got your company?
Data collection was carried out in the first quarter of 2013 and an online database for data
collection was created. Number of returned questionnaires was 164, which is a representative sample
in the research. Selected results have been published by authors [34–36].
One of the research objectives was the analysis of using the methods and tools for securing of
process quality (capability) in Slovak enterprises from selected industrial branches.
The following hypotheses were set for the questionnaire survey:
‚ H1: There is a positive dependence between the application of Six Sigma and the amount of return
on equity (ROE).
‚ H2: There is a positive dependence between the application of Six Sigma and the implementation
of quality management systems (QMS) according to the standards of ISO 9001.
Investigation of a dependency between SSM and QMS according to the standards ISO 9001 was
suggested after the assumption that QMS according to the standards ISO 9001 is focused on ensuring
and improving the process quality and it creates the basic prerequisites and necessary conditions for
implementation of Six Sigma. The next reason was finding if enterprises without certified QMS have
implemented the Six Sigma concept.
Results of the survey were processed by the application of several scientific methods of analysis,
synthesis, deduction, and comparison. Another group of applied methods include mathematical
methods focusing on the calculation of absolute, relative, and cumulative frequencies of the answers.
Cross-tabulations were used for the structural analysis of the relations and causalities.
The chi-square independence test (χ2) was used for hypotheses verification. It is necessary to
create alternative hypotheses alongside with the principal hypotheses for testing:
‚ H01: “There is no dependence between the application of Six Sigma and amount of the return on
equity ROE.”
‚ H02: “There is no dependence between the application of Six Sigma and implemented QMS.”
For independent phenomena it is applicable: A, B applies to P(A X B) = P(A) P(B); therefore, it is
inevitable to compare the empirically-determined frequencies nij with expected frequencies.
Estimated theoretic frequencies:
ˆπ
i. “ ni. ˜ n (1)
ˆπ
.j “ n.j ˜ n (2)
and estimated theoretic compound probability:
ˆπ
ij “ ˆπi. ˆ ˆπ.j “ ni. ˆ n ˆ n.j ˆ n “ ni. ˆ n.j ˆ n2 (3)
Therefore, the estimation of theoretic frequency is:
n1
ij “ ˆπij “
`
n ˆ ni. ˆ n.j
˘
˜ n2 “
`
ni. ˆ n.j
˘
˜ n (4)
Equation (4) shall be interpreted as a rule used for the calculation of the expected values:
Expected frequency “ sum in column { total sumˆsum in line (5)
Test statistics were calculated according to the following formula:
χ2 “
ÿ
ri
“1
ÿ
sj
“1
pnij ´ n’ijq2
nij
(6)
98
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
under the assumption of the independence of symbols X and Y, for sufficiently high n, the approximate
Pearson χ2 (ν) is a distribution with degrees of variance ν = (r ´ 1)(s ´ 1). (nij are empirical frequencies,
n´ij are theoretical, i.e., expected frequencies). We decline the hypothesis about the independence of
the symbols X and Y if:
χ2 ě χ21
´α
pνq , where ν “ pr´1q ps´1q (7)
2.3. Application Proceeding of Six Sigma Conception in Enterprises
The choice of enterprises for application of the Six Sigma concept resulted from findings in
the questionnaire survey. The focus was on industries where enterprises do not use the SSM and
achieve a low performance (ROE). To verify the generality of the SSM, regardless of the level of quality
management system, the enterprises with a different level of quality management were chosen.
For the proposed elaboration on how to implement the Six Sigma methodology, the DMAIC
phases were followed. In the respective phases of the DMAIC procedures, we carried out a selection
of the methods and tools so that all members of the project team would be able to apply them and
no special training or methods would be necessary for respective kind of production [18]. The key
components of the DMAIC cycle can be seen in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Key components of the DMAIC cycle.
In the Definition phase it is necessary to identify the problem, the connection of the process
with the requirements of the customer, form a project team and define goal and target level of critical
characteristics of the process quality.
A critical process and a specific problem in the process were identified by the defect analysis in the
process. Defects were divided into material and technological. The DPMO value, the process efficiency
as a total output revenue, and a level of Six Sigma were calculated. DPMO (Defects Per Million
Opportunities) denominates the number of defects that occur per one million opportunities at the
development or manufacturing of a product and can be calculated according to the following formula:
DPMO “ number of defect products
total number of products ˆnumber of opportunities per defect
ˆ106 (8)
PPM (Parts Per Million) denominates defects rate, i.e., the numerically-identified number of defects,
and those that really occurred, after manufacturing. Defects rate (PPM) is expressed by complementary
quantity, thus, by the proportion of units without defects to the value one.
99
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
OFD (Opportunities For Defects) is a probability of defects of one unit, which describes how
many places defects can occur.
Measurements of the defect frequency, according to the DPMO, and Sigma criteria can distinguish
the level of the process in regard of the defect frequency at the output and identify critical, bottleneck
points in the processes.
Subsequently, a critical process map, SIPOC, was elaborated (Suppliers-Inputs-Process-
Outputs-Customers). SIPOC is a process map that helps understand and identify process boundaries
and key processes to ensure focus only on the customer [9].
The target of the defined critical process and the final level of Six Sigma was determined in the
project charter proposal. The project charter contains an outline for the problem definition, project
team, time duration, and project target.
The objective of the phase Measurement is to gain relevant data about critical processes by
measurement of the key process attributes so that the problem area could be defined. In this phase,
potential sources for non–conformity in the process are identified. In the first phase, the quality index
of the critical process was determined and a number of measurements were done to find out the
capability of the process. The following methods were used:
- The measurement plan by Pande et al. [22]: five-phase methodology for measurement plan.
- Capability indexes Cp and Cpk: critical process capability evaluation in terms of keeping specified
or expected limits and an average value (see [4,18,37]).
- Histograms as a visual synthesis of frequency distribution and process variability.
Modules of descriptive statistics, industrial statistics, and Sigma process analysis were used for
the calculations.
In the phase Analysis, the attention is given to the data analysis and dependence verification of
type cause and effect, process comprehension with the objective to find out the key problem causes.
The following methods were used at the application in enterprises:
- Brainstorming: looking for causes of critical process incapability.
- Diagram of causes and effects—Ishikawa diagram: graphical visualization of coherence between
the problem and causes or possible solutions.
- Method FMEA (Failure Mode and Effect Analysis): analysis of the occurrence of failures, possible
causes and effects for the customer.
In the phase Improvement, solutions to eliminate problem causes are proposed, carried out and
verified. The applied methods:
- An action plan and diagram: solutions to eliminate the identified cause of failures and an
improvement of the critical process.
- Repetitive measurement of the critical process and the calculation of process capability indexes.
In the final phase Control, the results from the previous phases are evaluated, processes are
continually followed and the process control is carried out so that any variation from the target
value would be corrected before the effect of failure (non-conformity) occurs. The appropriate
implementation of the changes and improvements with the objective of the sustainable improved
condition is controlled. The applied methods include:
- QFD method (Quality Function Deployment): customer requirements are deployed into the
product characteristics and critical process outputs.
- Affinity diagram serves for identification of logical or causal connections between the problem
elements [13].
The applied procedure of the SSM in the companies was verified by the efficiency evaluation
of Six Sigma in the companies with a different level of quality management. For that purpose, the
100
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
hypothesis was tested: “Implementation of Six Sigma methodology would decrease the cost on claims
and non-conformities by at least 10%”. Verification of the hypothesis was carried out through economic
evaluation of the proposal based on the calculation of the cost of defects and through the calculation of
DPMO, process efficiency, and Sigma level after the application of the model. We used the method of
economic results comparison to compare the original and current situation of the critical processes.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Questionnaire Survey Results
This part presents the questionnaire survey results that show the rate of Six Sigma utilization
in the enterprises in Slovakia structured according to the industrial branches, company sizes, and
product types.
Cross-tabulation (Table 1) depicts the absolute and relative frequency of the utilization of the Six
Sigma method in individual groups divided according to the following factors: production type, the
number of employees, implemented quality management system according to ISO 9001 standard, and
the application of process management in the industrial branch.
Table 1. Cross-tabulation for Six Sigma and chosen variables.
Using Six Sigma
yes no
Frequency absolute relative absolute relative
Production type
mass 2 1.22% 29 17.68%
Job-work 0 0.00% 36 21.95%
Small-lot 2 1.22% 16 9.76%
Non production
activity 0 0.00% 58 35.37%
batch 6 3.66% 15 9.15%
Employees
1–10 0 0.00% 50 30.49%
11–50 0 0.00% 47 28.66%
51–250 1 0.61% 32 19.51%
over 250 9 5.49% 25 15.24%
QMS
yes 9 5.49% 62 37.80%
no 1 0.61% 92 56.10%
Process
management
yes 10 6.10% 113 68.90%
no 0 0.00% 41 25.00%
Industry
Automotive 4 2.44% 12 7.32%
Pulp and Paper 1 0.61% 1 0.61%
Woodworking 0 0.00% 21 12.80%
Electrical 1 0.61% 7 4.27%
Construction 0 0.00% 15 9.15%
Engineering 2 1.22% 28 17.07%
Wood cutting 0 0.00% 5 3.05%
Furniture 0 0.00% 11 6.71%
Other 2 1.22% 54 32.93%
Source: own processing.
The results show that only 10 enterprises out of 164, which is 6.1%, utilize Six Sigma methodology
at the process management level since all those companies apply a process approach towards
management. 40% of all companies utilizing the Six Sigma method belong to the automotive industry
branch, whereby this industrial branch is one of the most productive within the Slovak market. The
majority of the companies (60%) utilizing the Six Sigma method have a serial production. 90% of them
employ more than 250 employees and have implemented ISO 9001 standards.
101
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
Tables 2 and 3 demonstrate the measured and expected frequencies in the respective groups to
verify H1 hypothesis: there is a positive dependence between the application of Six Sigma and amount
of the return on equity ROE.
Table 2. Empirical frequencies for ROE.
Using Six Sigma
yes no
Frequency absolute relative absolute relative
ROE over 7%
yes 5 3.05% 26 15.85%
no 5 3.05% 128 78.05%
Total 10 6.10% 154 93.90%
Source: own processing.
Table 3. Expected frequencies for ROE.
Using Six Sigma
yes yes
Frequency absolute relative absolute relative
ROE over 7%
yes 1.89 1.15% 29.11 17.75%
no 8.11 4.95% 124.89 76.15%
Total 10 6.10% 154 93.90%
Source: own processing.
The data were processed by Statistica 10 software (Prague, the Czech Republic), which created
results of the Chi-square test presented in Table 4. Based upon the data, we can state that the value p is
lower than the level α = 0.05; therefore, we decline the null hypothesis about the independence with
95% probability and accept the H1 hypothesis; thus: “There is statistically relevant dependence between the
application of Six Sigma and amount of the return on equity ROE”.
Table 4. Results of Chi-square test for ROE.
Chi- square statistics Variance rate Value p
Pearson’s chi-square test 6.718157 1 0.00954
M-V chi-square test 5.312536 1 0.02117
Source: own processing.
Tables 5 and 6 present the measured and expected frequencies of the groups to verify H2
hypothesis: “There is a positive dependence between the application of Six Sigma and implemented
quality management system according to the standards ISO 9001”.
102
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
Table 5. Empirical frequencies for QMS.
Using Six Sigma
yes yes
Frequency absolute relative absolute relative
Implemented QMS yes 9 5.49% 62 37.80%
no 1 0.61% 92 56.10%
Total 10 6.10% 154 93.90%
Source: own processing.
Table 6. Expected frequencies for QMS.
Using Six Sigma
yes yes
Frequency absolute absolute absolute absolute
Implemented QMS yes 4.33 2.64% 66.67 40.65%
no 5.67 3.46% 87.33 53.25%
Total 10 6.10% 154 93.90%
Source: own processing.
For the calculation of the value p, Excel software was used, which uses formulas for the Pearson
Chi-squared test. Test significance (value p) is on the level 0.002096317, which is lower than α = 0,05,
and proves the statistic dependence of variables. The Chi-squared test can be applicable when all
table cells are filled, at least 80% of the theoretical frequencies apply to n‘ij ě 5, and the remaining
theoretical frequencies are n‘ij ą 1. However, in this case, the conditions of good approximation were
not kept and, at the same time, it is not possible to join the groups; therefore, it is necessary to complete
the research with further data so that hypothesis H2 would be confirmed. It is not possible to confirm
statistically relevant dependence among the searched variables. Nevertheless, the value p indicates a
possibility to examine this dependence using a major sample of respondents. The cross-tabulations
show that in 90% of the variables, Six Sigma is applied in those companies which have certified QMS
according to the standards ISO; on the other hand, this shall not be a condition for Six Sigma utilization.
3.2. Results of Six Sigma Application in Real Conditions of Enterprises
Six Sigma methodology, according to the DMAIC phases, was applied in two enterprises dealing
with furniture production with a different quality management system (QMS): a company with a
certified QMS according to the ISO 9001:2008 standard (hereafter, the Company) and a firm without
a certified QMS (hereafter, the Firm). The Company belongs among large companies with a series
production and is a part of a multinational concern. The Firm belongs to smaller enterprises with the
custom production of interior bespoke furniture.
The enterprises from the furniture industry were chosen from several reasons. According to
the results of the primary research, no furniture company uses SSM, enterprises reach the lowest
performance among analysed industrial branches, and most furniture companies are micro- and
small-sized without certified quality management systems.
The specific features of furniture production process had to be considered by proposal of
SSM implementation procedure. From the technologic-organizational view the process of furniture
production is divided into two phases bounded by a buffer store. The buffer store has a control
and organizational function. The first phase includes a production of particular furniture parts.
Inputs of this phase representing primary inputs for the whole production process are wood-based
panels, sawnwood, and decoration materials. Materials are divided to dimension timber, which are
103
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
synchronized with forms of parts. The next step is a form and construction treatment involving
pressing, sanding, and milling. The last step of the first phase is a surface preparation. The second
phase of production process is represented by joint of two groups of operations: surface finishing and
furniture assembly. The basic model of production can have more variants in dependency on type of
production input materials, technology, and product.
Having analyzed the input conditions in the enterprise and the options of usage of individual
methods, the results of the applications were as follows:
3.2.1. Phase D—DEFINE
The critical process was identified by the defect analysis in the production process. The
calculations of DPMO, process efficiency, and a sigma level were applied. The defects which appeared
in the processes were divided into material and technology defects.
The worst values in the Company occurred in the process of pressing which was identified as
critical. The efficiency of the pressing process range from 81.0165519% to 92.7540334% and the sigma
level moves from 2.38 to 2.96 which means the process is not stable. The average values are given in
Table 7. The defects in the pressing process were caused mostly during glue application representing
70.84% from the total defect number.
Table 7. Average values of DPMO, efficiency, and sigmas of selected processes in the Company.
Process DPMO Efficiency in % Sigma
Pressing 107,536.58 89.2666268 2.7
Side gluing 2802.89 99.7348749 4.3
Surface finish 1429.76 99.8600916 4.7
Assembly and
manipulation 7764.59 99.2360674 4.1
Source: own processing.
The worst values in the Company’s parameters occurred in the process of sanding. According
to DPMO 197,629.13 defects per million opportunities resulted, with the output value of the sanding
process expressed as the average value of efficiency was 80.23% and achieved the average sigma value
of 2.36. The average values are given in Table 8. The most numerous group of defects at sanding were
material faults, which occurred before the procedure of primer varnish coating and represented 71.5%
out of the total number of defects.
Table 8. Average values of DPMO, efficiency, and sigmas of selected processes in the Firm.
Process DPMO Efficiency in % Sigma
Sanding 197,629.13 80.2370870 2.36
Side gluing 49,407.28 99.7361300 5.48
Surface finish 26,388.71 97.3611296 3.47
Source: own processing.
Next SIPOC diagrams of the critical process were created for the process of pressing in the
Company, and for the process of sanding in the Firm. Lastly, the proposal of the project charter was
formulated. The selection of the project was based on the requirements of the enterprises to stabilize
and improve the process which is the most defective and where the enterprise can save at least 10%
of costs on defective products. The primary aim of the projects in both enterprises was to state the
decrease on the defective products. The basic information from the project charter for the Company for
the critical process of pressing, and for the Firm for the critical process of sanding, are stated in Table 9.
104
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
3.2.2. Phase M—MEASURE
In the phase of measuring, the quality measure was defined in the due critical process and series
of measurements (12 series by 10 measurements) was carried out. Variability of critical processes via
capability index calculations was found out by measuring the defined quality measure.
In the Company, in the operation of gluing within the critical process of pressing, the weight of a
glue layer on one side of a part in grams was, consequently, calculated to g/m2 was defined as the
quality measure. Measured values of weights of glue coating were used to state the process variability
by calculation of capability index Cp and capability index Cpk, where the upper standard level (USL)
of the weight of the glue coating was defined as 56 g/m2 and the lower standard level (LSL) of the
weight of the glue coating as 48 g/m2. Figure 2 shows the distribution of interval frequency of weights
of glue coatings in the sets of measurements D1 to D12 which shows heterogeneity signs. The values
of weights exceeded the upper standard level of 56 g/ m2 in 120 cases in the interval of 56–58 g/m2.
The excess of the lower standard level occurred in 28 cases.
Table 9. Basic data of the project charter.
Company Firm
Critical process Pressing Sanding
Problem identification Number of nonconforming parts
in the process is 5875 pcs
Number of nonconforming
parts in the output of the
processes 593 pcs
Problem relations Nonconforming parts in the
process relate to the glue coating
Nonconforming parts in the
process relate to the quality of
DTD and technical condition of
the production equipment—the
sanding machine
Objective definition
Lowering the number of
nonconforming parts and costs of
nonconforming parts by 10%
Lowering the number of
nonconforming parts and costs of
nonconforming parts by 10%
Target Sigma Level 2.85 2.7
Target non-conformity cost ratio 10% 2%
Source: own processing.
Variable: D1 - D12 Average: 52,5526
Sigma (TOTAL):3,21167 Sigma (INNER):3,19410
Specification : LSL= 48,0000 USL=56,0000
Indexes:Cp=,4174 Cpk=,3598
TOTAL
INNER
42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66
The weight of adhesive application g/m2
-3,s(T) LSL USL +3,s(T)
0
40
80
120
160
Multiplicity
Figure 2. Measuring the weight of adhesive application D1–D12.
105
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
The comb distribution points out that process variability is high and is not caused by a natural
fluctuation of variability in the process. The values of the capability indexes are also low; the overall
coefficient Cp = 0.4174 and the overall coefficient Cpk = 0.3598. Both coefficients are less than 1.
Therefore, and also based on total results, we can state that this production process is not capable.
In the Firm, in the critical process of sanding, a thickness of a part was stated as a quality measure.
Measured values of furniture parts thicknesses were used for calculations of capability index Cp and
capability index Cpk, where the upper standard level was defined as 19.3 mm and the lower standard
level was as 18.7 mm. As it can be seen in Figure 3, distribution of the interval frequency of part
thicknesses are rather variable.
Variable: Thickness H1 Average: 19,0393
Specification : LSL= 18,7000 USL=19,3000
Indexes:Cp=,6298 Cpk=,5472
18,4
18,5
18,6
18,7
18,8
18,9
19,0
19,1
19,2
19,3
19,4
19,5
19,6
19,7
Values of thickness H1 mm
-3,s LSL USL +3,s
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Multiplicity
Variable: Thickness H2 Average: 19,0431
Specification : LSL= 18,7000 USL=19,3000
Indexes:Cp=,6370 Cpk=,5455
17,8 18,0 18,2 18,4 18,6 18,8 19,0 19,2 19,4 19,6 19,8
Values of thickness H2 mm
-3,s LSL USL +3,s
0 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Multiplicity
(a)􀈱 (b)
Variable: Thickness H3 Average: 19,0618
Specification : LSL= 18,7000 USL=19,3000
Indexes:Cp=,6307 Cpk=,5009
18,4
18,5
18,6
18,7
18,8
18,9
19,0
19,1
19,2
19,3
19,4
19,5
19,6
19,7
19,8
Values of thickness H3 mm
-3,s LSL USL +3,s
0 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Multiplicity
Variable: Thickness H4 Average: 19,0531
Specification : LSL= 18,7000 USL=19,3000
Indexes.:Cp=,5866 Cpk=,4828
18,4
18,5
18,6
18,7
18,8
18,9
19,0
19,1
19,2
19,3
19,4
19,5
19,6
19,7
Values of thickness H4 mm
-3,s LSL USL +3,s
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Multiplicity (
c)􀈱 (
d)
Figure 3. (a) Measuring the thickness H1; (b) measuring the thickness H2; (c) measuring the thickness
H3; and (d) measuring the thickness H4.
As it can be seen in Figure 3, the shapes are asymmetrical, with comb ones which suggest that
variability in the process is quite high. Another factor supporting the concept of high variability are
the values of capability coefficients Cp, which ranged from 0.5866 to 0.6370. The values of capability
coefficient Cpk ranged from 0.4828 to 0.5472. Both coefficients in individual measurements accounted
for values less than 1. Therefore, we can state that the production process is not capable.
3.2.3. Phase A—ANALYZE
Based on the data gained by measurements, we focused on identification of the main problem,
sorting the possible causes, and identification of non-conformity causes which imposed the variability
of the critical process. This was used for brainstorming a method and, consequently, creating an
Ishikawa diagram. The first stage of possible cause occurrence was divided into five categories
106
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
in both enterprises: input materials, work conditions, operation equipment, employees, and
technological conditions.
In the Company, in the process of pressing—gluing, these causes of high process variability
were identified:
- Non-working control of technical parameters of the glue, such as temperature and viscosity,
which have the primary effect on the weight of glue coating on the parts of chipboard.
- Failures in compliance with technological discipline by the operator of the gluing machine, mainly
during the adjustment of glue thickness.
In the Firm, in the process of sanding, the following causes of incapability of the process
were recognized:
- Insufficient input control of technical parameters of input materials of chipboard during
the delivery.
- Incorrect choice of sandpaper grit.
- Insufficient clean-up of the production facility.
- Lack of attention during taking over the information from order schedules.
3.2.4. Phase I—IMPROVE and Phase C—CONTROL
To eliminate the causes of a non-conformity occurrence, a so-called “reaction plan”, which was
also depicted as a regulation diagram, was designed.
In the Company for the process of pressing—gluing, the reaction plan contains a graphic
illustration of the placement of values of glue coat weights in the individual phases of the
regulation diagram and adjustment, measurement, control, and the relegation of information for
an operational procedure.
In the Firm, the reaction plan focused on improvement of the sanding process. It contains the span
of setting and technological interval 19 ˘ 2 mm, a graphic illustration of the placement of measured
data, simple description of duties for the personnel at the control and service of the production facility.
Based on the instructions stated in the reaction plan, the repeated measurements were carried out
to verify the measures designed to decrease non-conformity.
In the Company, the measurement focused on the weight of glue coating as the main cause of the
high variability of the process of pressing. The asymmetric histogram in Figure 4 shows that variability
of the process compared to the original measurements decreased after corrective measures had been
carried out. The values of capability coefficients increased, which is well-proven by the increase of
the variability coefficient Cp from 0.4174 to 0.8313, and the value of coefficient Cpk increased from
0.3598 to 0.8061. After the reaction plan had been introduced, no excesses of upper and lower standard
levels occurred.
107
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
Variable : Z1 Average: 51,8789
Sigma (TOTAL):1,68581 Sigma (INNER):1,60398
Specification: 48,0000 USL=56,0000
Indexes.:Cp=,8313 Cpk=,8061
TOTAL
INNER
46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58
The weight of adhesive application g/m2
-3,s(T)
LSL
USL
+3,s(T)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Multiplicity
Figure 4. Repeated measuring of the weight of adhesive application.
In the Firm, verification of the solution design was carried out by the measurement of 24 parts
of veneered chipboard in the 96 valid measurements in the process of sanding. The results of the
measurements are shown in Figure 5. The truncated shape of the histogram in Figure 5 proves that
variability of the process of sanding, compared to original measurements, decreased after the corrective
measures were carried out. The values of capability coefficients increased, represented by the increase
of Cp from the lowest value of 0.5866 to 0.7383 and the value of Cpk increasing from 0.48288 to 0.6911.
Evident improvement of the process occurred in compliance with standard levels after the introduction
of the reaction plan into the process of sanding. In check measurements, the upper and lower standard
levels were not exceeded.
Variable: H - thickness after improving Average: 19,0192
Specification : LSL= 18,7000 USL=19,3000
Indexes.:Cp=,7383 Cpk=,6911
18,5 18,6 18,7 18,8 18,9 19,0 19,1 19,2 19,3 19,4 19,5
Thickness mm
-3,s LSL USL +3,s
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Multiplicity
Figure 5. Measuring the thickness of the panels following corrective actions.
In the Control phase, the particular corrective measures to improve variability in the identified
critical processes were recommended based on the achieved results. The QFD method was suggested
and implemented in the Company. The matrix diagram was created by transforming customer´s
requirements in the specification of the product—a cupboard/cabinet. In the Firm, the proposal of
measures to sustain the permanent quality of processes was presented via an affinity diagram.
108
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
3.3. Impacts of Implementation of Six Sigma Methodology in Enterprises
Verification of the hypothesis which assumes decreasing the costs on claims and non-conforming
products by 10% via implementation of Six Sigma was performed by comparison of the original and the
current state of the process, which were assessed as critical and by economic assessment of decreasing
costs of non-conformity.
Basic data to perform an economic assessment of the design were the numbers of non-conforming
products divided according to the kind of defects and the price of a part in € in the critical process
before and after implementation of Six Sigma.
In the Company, as is obvious from Table 10, we can see that total value of non-conforming
products in the process decreased. It can be stated that after implementation of suggestions to improve
quality by the Six Sigma methodology there was a decrease in the costs by 12.97%, which met the aim
outlined by the project charter.
Table 10. Economic assessment of the proposal in the Company—the process of pressing.
State
Number of
non-conformities
in pcs
Price in €/pcs Total sum in €
% share of
non-conformities in
production volume
Original 5879 8.23 34,277.95 3.40
Current 5324 8.23 29,833.75 2.18
Source: own processing.
An improvement can be also seen in the DPMO categories, which also decreased and the value
of effectiveness increased. The sigma value increased from 2.75 to 2.95. The sigma level was set to
increase from 2.75 to 2.85 in the aims of the project charter. The overview of the original and current
DPMO, efficiency, and sigma levels is presented in Table 11. On the basis of the mentioned analysis,
we can declare that the charter aim for the critical process of pressing was fully met. Based on the
above-mentioned results of the analyses in the process of pressing in the Company with a certified
system of quality management, the hypothesis can be confirmed.
Table 11. Values of DPMO, effectiveness, sigma level in the Company—the process of pressing.
State DPMO Effectiveness in % Sigma
Original 107,536.58 89.2463424 2.75
Current 73,261.27 92.9700000 2.95
Source: own processing.
In the Firm, the number of non-conforming products was counted before and after the
implementation of improvement proposals by the price of a part in € after sanding, before the primer
coat. As we can see in Table 12, there was a decrease in the total value of non-conforming products,
representing 8.25% of the total value of non-conforming products in the process of sanding caused by
faults in sanding before the primer coat. The aim set in the project charter was not achieved.
Table 12. Economic assessment of the proposal in the Firm—the process of sanding.
State
Number of
non-conformities
in pcs
Price in €/pcs Total sum in €
% share of
non-conformities in
production volume
Original 424 11.36 4816.64 3.40
Current 389 11.36 4419.04 2.18
Source: own processing.
109
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
Table 13 gives the overview of the original and current DPMO values, the value of effectiveness,
and sigma levels in the process of sanding in the Firm. The improvement appeared in the values of
DPMO categories, effectiveness, and the sigma level, which increased from 2.36 to 2.60. The aims of
the project charter proposed an increase of the sigma level from 2.36 to 2.7. Referring to the analysis,
we can declare that the aim of the project charter was not achieved at 100%. Referring to the results of
the analysis in the process of sanding in the Firm, which does not have a certified quality management
system, the hypothesis was not confirmed.
Table 13. Values of DPMO, effectiveness, sigma level in the Firm—the process of sanding.
State DPMO Effectiveness in % Sigma
Original 197,629.13 80.237087 2.36
Current 134,753.36 86.520000 2.60
Source: own processing.
3.4. The Model of Ensuring Sustainable Processes Performance via the Six Sigma Concep
The model describes essential activities according to DMAIC, methods, and tools of how to
ensure activities to improve quality of processes from the viewpoint of decreasing non-conformity
and DPMO, increasing effectiveness and sigma level, decreasing process variability, their stabilization,
the search, and analysis of causes of non-conformity occurrence, proposals to eliminate the causes
of non-conformity occurrence, process control, a procedure of the measurements and verification of
corrective measures, process management, the usage of methods and tools of descriptive statistics, the
usage of modules of industrial statistics, and Six Sigma modules.
The model introduces one cycle of improvement of process performance via the improvement of
an identified critical process, which can be constantly repeated and, so, constantly increased process
performance. It is illustrated in Figure 6.
110
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
MAP􀈱OF􀈱BUSINESS􀈱PROCESSES􀈱
DEFINE􀈱phase􀈱
MEASURE􀈱phase􀈱
Verification􀈱of􀈱effects􀈱
of􀈱actions􀈱
Proposal􀈱and􀈱realization􀈱
of􀈱actions􀈱eliminating􀈱
the􀈱problem􀈱
Arrangement􀈱of
possible􀈱causes􀈱of􀈱
problem􀈱
Setting􀈱the􀈱problem􀈱
and􀈱cause􀈱
Identification􀈱of􀈱
critical􀈱process􀈱and􀈱
goal􀈱of􀈱its􀈱output􀈱
Process􀈱defect􀈱
analysis􀈱
Process􀈱capability􀈱
measuring􀈱
Defining􀈱key􀈱
indicator􀈱and􀈱
measurement􀈱plan􀈱
ANALYZE􀈱phase􀈱
Control􀈱of􀈱quality􀈱
and􀈱changes􀈱in􀈱
critical􀈱process􀈱
Monitoring􀈱critical􀈱
process􀈱and􀈱customer􀈱
requirments􀈱
CONTROL􀈱phase􀈱
IMPROVE􀈱phase􀈱
􀁸 SIPOC􀈱map􀈱
􀁸 Histogram􀈱
􀁸 Project􀈱charter􀈱
􀁸 Effectiveness􀈱
􀁸 DPMO􀈱 􀈱
􀁸 Sigma􀈱level􀈱
􀁸 Non􀈬conformity􀈱costs􀈱
􀁸 Effectiveness􀈱
􀁸 DPMO􀈱 􀈱
􀁸 Effectiveness􀈱
􀁸 Sigma􀈱level􀈱
􀁸 Effectiveness􀈱
Measurement􀈱
methodology􀈱by􀈱 􀈱
Pande􀈱et􀈱al.􀈱
􀁸 Capability􀈱indices􀈱(Cp,􀈱
Cpk)􀈱
􀁸 Industrial􀈱statistics􀈱
&Sigma—process􀈱analysis􀈱
􀁸 Ishikawa􀈱diagram􀈱
􀁸 Method􀈱FMEA􀈱
􀁸 Affinity􀈱diagram􀈱
Brainstorming􀈱
Action􀈱plans􀈱and􀈱
diagrams􀈱
Repetitive􀈱measurement:􀈱
Process􀈱capability􀈱indices􀈱
Industrial􀈱statistics􀈱&Sigma􀈱 􀈱
􀁸 Monitoring􀈱Cp,􀈱Cpk􀈱
􀁸 QFD􀈱method􀈱
􀁸 Affinity􀈱diagram􀈱
Figure 6. The model of ensuring sustainable processes performance. Source: own processing.
4. Conclusions
The results of the survey of the Slovak enterprises confirmed positive effects of the Six Sigma
methodology presented in the studies of several foreign authors. Slovak enterprises which use the
111
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
methodology achieve not only higher performance of business processes, but also higher corporate
performance. Moreover, the dependency of achieved corporate performance on the use of Six
Sigma was statistically confirmed. The application of Six Sigma methodology in practical conditions
of Slovak enterprises producing furniture confirmed achievement of better results in the field of
ensuring and improving the quality of production processes, an increase of savings on costs of
claims and nonconforming products, and a possibility to implement measures to eliminate causes of
non-conformity occurring in a process.
The limitations of the research study consist in the insufficient statistical confirmation of
dependency on SSM on a certified quality management system because of a small number of
investigated enterprises with an implemented Six Sigma concept. The next part of the work was
focused on two specific cases: two furniture manufacturing enterprises from 500 existing furniture
companies in Slovakia. Therefore, a generalization will require further careful investigation.
Despite the above-mentioned limitations, the research study proved a possibility to implement the
Six Sigma methodology and to use the same methods in enterprises, aside from a quality management
system, such as quality management under certification according to ISO 9001 standards or only
utilizing the basic tools of quality management.
The results of the study further showed that better results were achieved in the enterprise which
has introduced a quality management system. Therefore, we may claim that quality management
systems form better grounds to implement Six Sigma and the achievement of higher benefits.
The results of this work develops contemporary knowledge in assumptions and limitations by the
application of Six Sigma methodology and its tools in connection with quality management systems
and they indicate a direct dependence with a level of corporate performance. The contribution of
the research study can be considered in the first application of SSM in enterprises within specific
conditions of furniture production processes.
The practical implications of the research can be seen in the suggested model, including
procedures, suitable methods, and tools for implementation and permanent utilization of SSM in
manufacturing enterprises. The suggested model of sustainably ensuring the required performance of
processes enables monitoring and unveils the critical moments of processes, constantly, and eliminate
them, subsequently. The model presents a never-ending cycle, which ensures sustainable process
performance. The SSM and a suitable selection of tools are the means of a constant assurance and
increase of business processes performance. Six Sigma provides a permanent improvement of processes
by the effective use of methods, tools, techniques, and procedures, particularly by decreasing variability
and variance of processes, by an increase of capability of processes.
Further research will be focused on the utility of other modern methods and tools by ensuring
a sustainable process performance and its continual improvement with higher effects than SSM,
especially in enterprises without a certified quality management system. The research work will
also deal with other aspects of process improvement, such as process economic efficiency and lean
processes leading to the suggestion of a methodology for complex improvement of the process.
Acknowledgments: This article has been supported by funds of the project No. 1/0286/16 under VEGA agency,
Slovakia for covering the publishing costs.
Author Contributions: Andrea Sujova designed the study and conducted literature review. Lubica Simanova
performed case study in enterprises. Katarina Marcinekova processed research data and performed statistical
analyses. The first author wrote the manuscript and all authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
112
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
Appendix
Table A1. The use of methods and tools in the steps of DMAIC procedure.
Method D M A I C
Affinity diagram o o o o o
FMEA—Failure Mode Effect Analysis o o
CBA—Cost-Benefit-Analysis o o
FTA—Failure tree analysis o
MSA—Measurement system analysis o
Analysis of measurement systems R&R o
Audit o o o
Affinity diagram o o o o o
Benchmarking o o
Benwriting o o o o o
Techniques of data collection o o
Cause and effect diagram o o
QFD—Quality Function Deployment o o o o
Histogram o
IPO diagram o o
Control diagrams (tables) o
Scatter diagram o o o o
Pareto diagram of a Lorentz curve o o
Method of error avoidance Poka–Yoke o
Flow chart o o o
DOE—Design of Experiments o o
Control chart o o
Run chart o o
Regression analysis o
Table SIPOC
(Suppliers-Inputs-Process-Outputs-Customers) o o o o o
SOP—Standard Procedures o o
VOC—Voice of customer o o o o
Stratification o o o o o
SWOT Analysis o
T-test o o
Six Sigma matrix o o
TOC—Theory of containts o
X2 test o o o o o
Methods of risk analysis o o o
Process capability o o
Reliability/Item Analysis o o
Root Cause Analysis o
Method 5 Why o
SI—System engineering o o o
VA—Value Analysis o o
VS—Value steam mapping o
Modelling and simulation o
Method Global 8D o
TPM—Total Productive Maintenance o
SMED—Single Minute Exchange of Dies o
Method 5S o
KAIZEN o
Pull management systems o
SPC—Statistical Process Control o o o o
Workshops o o o o
Management by Objectives o
Source: [1–4,17,27–33].
113
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
References
1. Carvalho, G.; Christo, E.S.; Costa, K.A. Application of Six Sigma Methodology in Improving of the Industrial
Production Processes. Appl. Mech. Mater. 2014, 9, 327–331. [CrossRef]
2. Ev, G.; Scaria, J. Reducing rejection and rework by application of Six Sigma methodology in manufacturing
process. Int. J. Six Sigma Compet. Advant. 2010, 1, 77–99.
3. Korenko, M.; Uhrin, P.; Kaplík, P.; Foldešiová, D. Application of Six Sigma Methodology in Production
Organization. Adv. Mater. Res. 2013, 9, 87–94.
4. Al-Agha, O.; Alzubaidi, A.J.; Al-Agha, M.I. Implementing Six Sigma Methodology in Industrial Control
Systems. Int. J. Comput. Appl. Technol. 2015, 5, 2229–6093.
5. Kaushik, P.; Khanduja, D.; Mittal, K. A case study: Application of Six Sigma methodology in a small and
medium-sized manufacturing enterprise. TQM J. 2012, 1, 4–16. [CrossRef]
6. Rabeea, O.; Al-Mfraji, M.; Almsafir, M.K. Sustainable Competitive Advantage Using Six Sigma Methodology:
Review. J. Mod. Mark. Res. 2012, 1, 10–26.
7. Schroeder, R.A. Six Sigma: The Breakthrough Management Strategy Revolutionizing the World’s Top Corporations;
Currency: Sydney, Australia, 2006.
8. Sahu, N.; Sridhar, N. Six Sigma Implementation using DMAIC approach: A case Study in a Cylinder Linear
manufacturing Firm. Int. J. Mech. Product. Eng. Res. Dev. 2013, 4, 11–22.
9. Ng, K.C.; Chong, K.E.; Goh, G.G.G. Improving Overall Equipment Effectiveness (OEE) through the six
sigma methodology in a semiconductor firm: A case study. In Proceedings of International Conference on
Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management, Selangor, Malaysia, 9–12 December 2014; pp. 833–837.
10. Gibbons, P.M. Incorporating six sigma thinking and asset management strategy performance indicators into
the overall equipment effectiveness measure. In Proceedings of the second European Research Conference
on Continuous Improvement and Lean Six Sigma, Bristol, UK, 18 January 2010.
11. Kadri, S. Six Sigma Methodology for the Environment Sustainable Development. In Mechanism Design for
Sustainability, 1st ed.; Luo, Z., Ed.; Springer: Berline, Germany, 2013; pp. 61–76.
12. Sin, A.B.; Zailani, S.; Iranmaneshb, M.; Ramayah, T. Structural equation modelling on knowledge creation
in Six Sigma DMAIC project and its impact on organizational performance. Int. J. Product. Econ. 2015, 168,
105–117.
13. Jacobs, B.W.; Swink, M.; Linderman, K. Performance effects of early and late Six Sigma adoptions. J. Oper.
Manag. 2015, 36, 244–257. [CrossRef]
14. Karthi, S.; Devadasan, S.R.; Murugesh, R.; Sreenivasa, C.G.; Sivaram, N.M. Global views on integrating Six
Sigma and ISO 9001 certification. Total Qual. Manag. Bus. Excell. 2012, 23, 237–262. [CrossRef]
15. Chiarini, A. Relationships between total quality management and Six Sigma inside European manufacturing
companies: A dedicated survey. Int. J. Product. Qual. Manag. 2013, 11, 179–194. [CrossRef]
16. Chiarini, A. A comparison between companies’ implementation of Six Sigma and ISO 13053 requirements:
A first investigation from Europe. Int. J. Process Manag. Benchmarking 2013, 3, 154–172. [CrossRef]
17. Töpfer, A. Six Sigma, 1st ed.; Computer Press: Praha, Czech Republic, 2008; p. 287.
18. Simanova, L. Specific Proposal of the Application and Implementation Six Sigma in Selected Processes of the
Furniture Manufacturing. Procedia Econ. Financ. 2015, 34, 268–275. [CrossRef]
19. Albliwi, S.A.; Antony, J.; Lim, S.A.H. A systematic review of Lean Six Sigma for the manufacturing industry.
Bus. Process Manag. J. 2015, 21, 665–691. [CrossRef]
20. Kuvvetli, Ü.; Firuzan, A.R.; Alpaykut, S.; Gerger, A. Determining Six Sigma success factors in Turkey by
using structural equation modeling. J. Appl. Stat. 2016, 43, 738–753. [CrossRef]
21. Arumugam, V.; Antony, J.; Kumar, M. Linking learning and knowledge creation to project success in Six
Sigma projects: An empirical investigation. Int. J. Product. Econ. 2013, 141, 388–402. [CrossRef]
22. Pande, P.S.; Neumann, P.R.; Cavanagh, R.R. Zavádíme Metodu Six Sigma, 1st ed.; TwinsCom: Brno,
Czech Republic, 2008.
23. Fan, J.J.; Fan, J.; Qian, C.; Yung, K.; Fan, X.; Zhang, G.; Pecht, M. Optimal Design of Life Testing for
High-Brightness White LEDs Using the Six Sigma DMAIC Approach. IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Reliab. 2015,
15, 576–587. [CrossRef]
24. Dora, M.; Gellynck, X. Lean Six Sigma Implementation in a Food Processing SME: A Case Study. Qual. Reliab.
Eng. Int. 2015, 31, 1151–1159. [CrossRef]
114
Sustainability 2016, 8, 260
25. Ericsson, E.; Gingnell, L.; Lillieskold, J. Implementing Design for Six Sigma in large Swedish product
developing organisations-an interview study. Total Qual. Manag. Bus. Excell. 2015, 26, 648–660. [CrossRef]
26. Aldowaisan, T.; Nourelfath, M.; Hassan, J. Six Sigma performance for non-normal processes. Eur. J. Oper.
Res. 2015, 247, 968–977. [CrossRef]
27. Chao-Ton, S.; Chia-Jan, C. A Systematic Methodology for the Creation of Six Sigma Projects: A Case Study
of Semi-conductor Foundry. Expect Syst. Appl. 2008, 34, 2693–2703.
28. Pyzdek, T.; Keller, P. The Six Sigma Handbook, 4th ed.; McGraw-Hill Professional: London, UK, 2014.
29. Okpala, K.E. Total Quality Management and SMPS Performance Effects in Nigeria: A Review of Six Sigma
Methodology. Asian J. Financ. Account. 2012, 2, 363–378. [CrossRef]
30. Sanchez, J.; Valles, A. Successful Projects from the Application of Six Sigma Methodology. In Six Sigma
Projects and Personal Experiences; InTech: Rijeka, Croatia, 2011; pp. 91–116. Available online: https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/221913365 (accessed on 19 November 2015).
31. Prashar, A. Using Shainin DOE for Six Sigma: An Indian case study. Product. Plan. Control 2016, 27, 83–101.
[CrossRef]
32. Vinod, M.; Devadasan, S.R.; Sunil, D.T.; Thilak, V.M.M. Six Sigma through Poka-Yoke: A navigation through
literature arena. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2015, 81, 315–327. [CrossRef]
33. Nenadál, J.; Plura, J. Moderní Management Jakosti, 1st ed.; Management Press: Praha, Czech Republic, 2008;
pp. 348–354.
34. Sujova, A. Business Process Performance Management—A Modern Approach to Corporate Performance
Management. In Proceedings of International Conference Liberec Economic Forum, Liberec, Czech Republic,
16–17 September 2013; pp. 542–550.
35. Sujová, A.; Marcineková, K. Modern Methods of Process Management Used in Slovak Enterprises.
Procedia Econ. Financ. 2015, 23, 889–893. [CrossRef]
36. Marcineková, K.; Sujová, A. The Influence of the Process Control Level on the Enterprises’ ROE.
Procedia Econ. Financ. 2015, 34, 290–295. [CrossRef]
37. Simanova, L.; Gejdos, P. The Use of Statistical Control Tools to Quality Improving in Furniture Business.
Procedia Econ. Financ. 2015, 34, 276–283. [CrossRef]
© 2016 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
115
sustainability
Article
Risk Management in Critical
Infrastructure—Foundation for Its Sustainable Work
Andrzej Bialas
Institute of Innovative Technologies EMAG, 40-189 Katowice, Leopolda 31, Poland; andrzej.bialas@ibemag.pl;
Tel.: +48-32-200-77-00; Fax: +48-32-200-77-01
Academic Editors: Adam Jabło ´ nski, Giuseppe Ioppolo and Marc A. Rosen
Received: 24 October 2015; Accepted: 26 February 2016; Published: 4 March 2016
Abstract: The paper concerns research related to the European project CIRAS and presents a
validation experiment with the use of a risk management tool adapted for critical infrastructures.
The project context and state of the art are discussed. The adaptation of the risk management tool
is performed according to previously elaborated requirements which consider interdependencies,
cause-consequences analysis, risk measures and risk register implementation. A novel structured risk
management method was proposed how to deal with internal and external impacts of a hazardous
event which occurred in the given CI. The method is embedded into the critical infrastructure
resilience process. These requirements can be implemented on the ready-to-use software platform for
further experiments. The experimentation results are used as the input for CIRAS. The discussed
tool can be applied as the risk reduction component in the CIRAS Tool, and the validation process
presented here is the basis to elaborate two project use cases.
Keywords: critical infrastructure; risk management; bow-tie concept; software tool; interdependencies
1. Introduction
The paper concerns the risk management issue in critical infrastructures. Today’s societies are
based on products and services provided by large-scale technical infrastructures of such sectors
as energy, oil, gas, finances, transport, telecommunications, health, etc. These infrastructures,
when disrupted or destroyed, have a serious impact on health, safety, security or well-being of
the society or effective functioning of governments and/or economies, therefore they are called critical
infrastructures (CIs). Smooth functioning of the CIs builds right relationships between the citizens
and governments. Modern societies are very sensitive to any disturbances in critical infrastructures.
The CI disturbances or damages hamper the economic growth, social prosperity and sustainable
development of our civilization. For this reason, it is very important to mitigate any negative impact on
critical infrastructures. Risk management, which plays the key role in the CI protection, still remains a
challenge due to many unresolved problems. This was the author’s motivation to undertake research
in this field.
CI is identified as a very complex socio-technical system, sometimes called a system of
systems. The system of systems (SoS) consists of multiple, heterogeneous, distributed, occasionally
independently operating systems embedded in networks at multiple levels, which evolve over time [1].
To function properly, CIs include many diversified components (technological, IT hardware, software,
environmental, personal, organizational) and complex processes interrelated with other processes
across different economy sectors.
In such environments different kinds of threats and hazards may occur, such as: natural disasters
and catastrophes, technical disasters and failures, espionage, international crime, physical and cyber
terrorism. To avoid disturbances in CIs and to minimize possible consequences of threats, critical
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240; doi:10.3390/su8030240 116 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
infrastructure protection (CIP) programmes are implemented, which specify a consistent set of
diversified security measures applied for the given CI: technical, organizational and procedural.
The measures should properly affect the identified risk. The measures selection is based on risk
management principles.
1.1. Resilience and Risk Management in Critical Infrastructures
Risk management is a continuous process including the identification, analysis, and assessment
of potential hazards in a system or hazards related to a certain activity. Based on the recognized risk
picture, the risk control measures are proposed to eliminate or reduce potential harms to people,
environment, or other assets. The risk management process encompasses risk monitoring and
communication. ISO 31000 [2] is the basic risk management standard. Examples of the most recognized
risk management methods and techniques are included in IEC 31010 [3].
The risk management issue in critical infrastructures has a specific character because CIs are very
complex, diversified and there are mutual interrelations between different infrastructures. Because
of relationships between infrastructures, the state of each infrastructure influences or is correlated to
the state of the other. They are called interdependencies [4–7] and can be divided to four categories:
physical, cyber, geographical and logical interdependency. The effects of an incident may propagate
across CIs with dire consequences. The paper takes into account interdependencies, however the
complex interdependencies issues are not the basic topic of the paper.
Well-secured CIs can resist external and internal disturbances and are able to work on an
acceptable efficiency level even when these disturbances occur. To improve the CI resilience is the main
objective of CI stakeholders. The CIs resilience is an effective, sustainable use of critical infrastructures
by stakeholders to perform tasks for the economy, government and citizens. “The concept of resilience
can be seen as a superset in which typical risk assessment is a complementary part” [6]. The following
activities leading to the CI resilience are proposed in this publication:
‚ preparing the CI specification based on the structural analysis—the most critical elements, the most
vulnerable points, dependencies and interdependencies are identified; please note: dependency
defines a unidirectional relationship between infrastructures, while interdependency defines a
bidirectional relationship;
‚ running the dynamic analysis to identify the most dangerous risk scenarios—generally the subject
of analysis or simulation are: propagation of dire effects of CIs phenomena, identification of
the threats impact, analyses of common failures, system response to a failure or an incident,
recovery process, etc.
‚ the most dangerous risk scenarios, prioritized, are taken into account later during the risk
management process.
1.2. Research Related to the CIRAS Project
The critical infrastructure protection is recognized in European Union (EU) as one of the key
issues. The CIP related needs on the EU and member-state levels are expressed in the European
Council (EC) Directive [8]. It specifies rules of the CI identification based on the casualties, economics
and public criteria, as well as the risk analysis issues and management programmes. In 2006 the
European Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection (EPCIP) was issued. A revised version is
included in the EC document [9].
The CIP programmes encompass diversified (physical, technical, organizational) countermeasures,
applied on the basis of risk. The risk management issue in CIs is extremely important and has
not been fully solved so far. There are several dozen EU or worldwide CIP R&D projects, either
already completed or currently running (Framework Programmes—FP6 and FP7, Horizon 2020,
The Prevention, Preparedness and Consequence Management of Terrorism and other Security-related
117
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
Risks Programme—CIPS). Most of them deal with risk management methodologies and their
supporting tools. The CIRAS (Critical Infrastructure Risk Assessment Support) project [10] is one of them.
The paper concerns a preliminary research of the CIRAS project. CIRAS was launched by the
international consortium comprising:
‚ ATOS Spain SA (ATOS),
‚ Center for European Security Strategies from Germany (CESS),
‚ Institute of Innovative Technologies EMAG from Poland (EMAG).
The CIRAS objective is to develop a methodology and tool to support decision makers in the
security measures selection for critical infrastructures. The CIRAS approach to security management
in critical infrastructure protection takes into account typical CI phenomena like interdependencies,
cascading and escalation of incident impacts.
The novelty of the CIRAS approach lies in a holistic assessment of all aspects of CIs security
measures, including the expected risk reduction and its cost, financial benefits, as well as many vague
socio-political factors to be considered in the security planning process. To select the right security
measure (countermeasure) according to the CIRAS methodology, the decision maker should select a
countermeasure that:
‚ properly reduces the risk volume to ensure security on an accepted level and to bring benefits for
CI stakeholders,
‚ is cost-effective during implementation and operation,
‚ is free of social, psychological, political, legal, ethical, economical, technical, environmental,
and other limitations; these vague factors in the project are called “qualitative criteria”.
To support the decision making process, these issues are solved by three separate pillars,
implemented as the key software components of the CIRAS Tool:
‚ a Risk Reduction Assessment (RRA) component,
‚ a Cost-Benefit Assessment (CBA) component,
‚ a Qualitative Criteria Assessment (QCA) component.
The CIRAS approach is based on the methodology elaborated in the FP7 (Seventh Framework
Programme) ValueSec project [11]. Both the ValueSec and CIRAS methodologies support the
decision making process using these three pillars, but the domains of applications and the pillars
implementation approaches are different. Please note that the critical infrastructure domain, due to its
specific phenomena caused by interdependencies, is much more complex than the ValueSec application
domains (mass event security, mass transportation security, communal security planning, air transport
security, protection against cyber-attacks on a smart grid). The CIs complexity influences the shape of
the RRA, CBA and QCA components as well as the components collaboration within the framework
implemented in the CIRAS Tool.
Research was performed by the project team members to elaborate the CIRAS methodology and
to design and implement it in the CIRAS Tool. The project uses four main inputs:
‚ an extensive review of the state of the art of risk management, cost-benefits, and decision support
methodologies and tools, especially those for critical infrastructure protection,
‚ conclusions from the CIRAS stakeholders’ workshops,
‚ experience gained by the CIRAS team members from the ValueSec project, particularly concerning
the pillars implementation.
This paper deals with a part of this research focused on the RRA component implementation.
The problems addressed are:
‚ how to find and adapt a tool to be the RRA component,
118
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
‚ how to develop a new tool, according to the project requirements, if the above is not possible.
The RRA component should satisfy the project requirements:
‚ the basic requirements for CI risk management tools identified in [12], and
‚ the project specific requirements identified by the consortium with the stakeholders’ help, i.e., RRA
should be able to properly manage the risk in critical infrastructures by selecting security measures
with the right cost-benefits parameters and free of vague restrictions, should be able to easily
integrate with other CIRAS components of the tool, and should be relatively simple.
The research presented in this article was focused on the feasibility of the OSCAD-based RRA.
OSCAD (proprietary name) [13] is a ready-made software platform to be adapted and configured
to different domains of application. The CIRAS consortium considered it a candidate for the
RRA component.
This paper presents research which allowed to assess whether OSCAD can fulfil the project
requirements and whether it can be used as the RRA component of the CIRAS Tool.
As a result of the experiment a novel approach is proposed how to deal with internal and external
impacts of a hazardous event which occurred in the given CI. It allows to distinguish three main
categories of impacts: direct CI damages, event escalation by breaching internal security barriers and
causing secondary damages, event escalation from the given CI on the dependent CIs. The elaborated
structured risk management method for critical infrastructures is embedded into the CI resilience
process. The method is implemented in the OSCAD-CIRAS experimental tool. The tool allows to
assess critical infrastructure damages in several time horizons and to assess several security measures
alternatives with respect to the risk reduction and cost-benefits parameters.
1.3. State of the Art
During the CIRAS project a review [4,14–16] of laws, standards, frameworks, methods and tools
was performed and summarized in [17].
The review confirms that the risk management issue in critical infrastructures is much more
complicated than in other domains of application. It is specific due to the following factors:
‚ unprecedented CIs complexity, even when compared to very large business organizations or
technical facilities,
‚ continuous evolution and enhancement of critical infrastructures,
‚ mutual interrelations between different infrastructures (interdependencies),
‚ problem diversity—the risk management issue is related to many other issues, like: complex
systems architectures, interdependencies, complex interactions, behavioral aspects, reliability
theory, vulnerability analysis, resilience, emerging behavior,
‚ knowledge of architecture and functioning principles of complex systems is fuzzy and the
data incomplete,
‚ different abstraction levels applied to manage CIs and cross-sectoral relations,
‚ high-impact and low-probability events may occur,
‚ increased needs for communication and coordination among the CI operators.
The review shows that a significant number of risk assessment methods and tools can be applied
in the critical infrastructure domain. Usually, they were developed for different organizations to solve
their technical or organizational risk-related problems within the limited environments, and initially
they were not dedicated to critical infrastructures. Later, many of them were adapted to CI needs.
Usually, they are very mature, sector-specific, represent the detailed approach to the risk issue and
can be easily applied on the lower level of the CI hierarchy. Their basic features are: threats and
vulnerabilities categorization and identification, and the evaluation of impacts. Only few tools are able
to operate on the higher CI hierarchy level. This group is still extended.
119
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
Risk management methods are very diverse and their shapes and abstraction levels depend on
the levels of CIs where they are used. For example, a CI operator needs a more detailed approach than
a policy maker working on the system-of-systems level, and the tool implemented for the CI asset
level is more detailed than the tool for the CI operator. Generally, a higher CI level requires a more
general approach.
The asset level methods and tools are adapted to higher levels but this generates problems
how to handle cross-sectoral dependencies. This issue has been examined by many researchers.
The challenge is how to adapt risk assessment methods used on the CI lower level to the higher level
(complex system) needs.
The interdependency methodologies, supporting risk management methodologies, are growing
in a parallel manner to each other. They are based on modeling and simulation techniques [6]. They are
crucial to ensure the CI resilience, and in this sense they also support risk management methodologies.
Many general purpose risk managers are not able to use input from the interdependencies analysis.
The review confirms that it is very hard to point out a tool which can be applied in the CIRAS Tool.
There are many tools which satisfy certain basic requirements and are able to assess and manage the
risk in critical infrastructures, however they do not address sufficiently the CIRAS project requirements,
especially those related to the following issues:
‚ cross-sectoral risk management,
‚ cooperation with the CBA and QCA components (using cost, benefit, and vague factors in the risk
management process),
‚ operations on the alternative packages of countermeasures,
‚ easy integration (connectivity, source code availability, commonly used technologies).
During the review the OSCAD was analyzed in comparison with other tools. This is a general
purpose tool (software platform) which, when developed, was not intended especially for CIs. The tool
is very flexible. Its functionality satisfies the basic CI risk management requirements and there is also
a chance to meet the CIRAS project requirements. The paper presents research allowing to explain
these issues.
1.4. Paper Content
The paper presents the following: a risk management study (Section 2) including the
experimentation platform requirements, risk assessment method description, implementation of the
requirements on the ready-made software platform, experiment plan workout, and the experimentation
process. Section 3 includes the experimentation summary, and Section 4—the paper summary.
2. Risk Management Case Study
The case study is focused on the analysis how particular project requirements can be fulfilled by
the OSCAD-based RRA, and shows step by step how this component has been developed according to
the proposed risk management method.
2.1. General Requirements for Experimental Risk Manager
Basic requirements for the CI risk management tool were discussed in [12]. Summarizing this
discussion, the following requirements were proposed:
(1) The CI specific phenomena, such as common cause failures, cascading and escalating effects,
as well as interdependencies between CIs [5] should be considered in the risk management process.
(2) The bow-tie risk concept [4,18] is recommended for implementation as the conceptual model
of the risk assessment tool. It embraces both causes of the given hazardous event and its diversified
and multidirectional consequences.
120
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
(3) The CI risk register, as the managed inventory of hazardous events used in CIP programmes,
should include at a minimum: related hazards/threats, corresponding hazardous event, probability
of the event and its consequences. There are some other data associated with the risk register items,
such as assets, societal critical functions, vulnerabilities, countermeasures, etc.
(4) Risk measures and the assessment process should be defined for the given application domain.
A common method is to assess the likelihood (probability, frequency) of a hazardous event, and to
assess the consequence severity in different dimensions. Risk is the function of both, usually expressed
by a risk matrix.
The following issues are relevant with respect to the CIRAS project requirements:
(1) The RRA component should be able:
‚ to assess risk before a measure is implemented and reassess the risk for a certain number of
security measures alternatives considered for implementation,
‚ to consider cross-sectoral dependencies,
‚ to take into account cost-benefits factors and qualitative criteria dealing with the security
measures alternatives.
(2) RRA should exchange information with the CBA and QCA components during the decision
process dealing with the security measures selection.
(3) RRA component should consider the CI specific phenomena, analyze causes and impacts of
hazardous events, and manage the risk register data.
The data exchange between the components cannot be fully demonstrated, because the
components have not been integrated yet.
2.2. Implementation Platform
The OSCAD software platform was chosen as the research platform [13]. Initially, this platform
was designed to support business continuity management in accordance with ISO 22301 and
information security management in accordance with ISO/IEC 27001. The software can identify
different disturbances of business processes and/or breaches of information assets in different
companies and organizations. OSCAD helps to reduce their losses, caused by incidents, and can
support the recovery process too. OSCAD is an open and flexible tool, therefore it can be adapted to
protect assets or processes in different application domains, e.g.,: flood protection [19], railway safety
management systems [20] and coal mining [21]. The risk management functionality of OSCAD is of
key importance to the protection of critical infrastructures.
OSCAD is equipped with risk assessment tools which analyze the causes of hazardous events
(pairs: threat-vulnerability with respect to the asset or process):
‚ Asset Oriented Risk Analyzer (AORA),
‚ Process Oriented Risk Analyzer (PORA).
AORA is used to calculate risk levels of critical assets and risk reduction levels after security
measures implementation. The analysis is conducted for the given asset with the related threats which
exploit the asset vulnerabilities. The impact and likelihood values of threats and the current values of
security measures are used to determine the inherent risk level. After applying new security measures,
the risk level is reassessed and the gain in risk reduction can be determined. The PORA analysis is
similar, however, it is focused on causes of the processes disturbances.
Moreover, OSCAD is equipped with tools which are able to analyze multidimensional impacts of
hazardous events:
‚ Asset Oriented Business Impact Analyzer (ABIA),
‚ Process Oriented Business Impact Analyzer (PBIA).
121
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
ABIA is used to assess possible impacts of assets loss for an organization (here CI). The assessment
is made according to different loss categories such as: fatalities and qualitative costs (political, social,
legal), damages of infrastructure, revenue loss, external costs in other organizations. High loss levels
indicate that security measures should be applied to reduce risk. PBIA is similar, however it concerns
impacts for an organization (here CI), when the processes are disturbed.
As a result of the adaptation, the OSCAD-CIRAS tool prototype was developed [22].
The OSCAD adaptation performed by the author encompasses the elaboration of the domain specific
system dictionaries, e.g., assets, threats, vulnerabilities, countermeasures, risk measures, software
configuration, etc. OSCAD-CIRAS can be used as an experimental tool to acquire knowledge and
experience which will then be used as an input to the CIRAS project.
2.3. Requirements Implementation on the Ready-Made Software Platform
The paper extends the works presented in [23] and deals with risk management experiments
conducted with the use of the ready-made open OSCAD software platform, which was adapted
to fulfill the basic CIs requirements with respect to risk management. It was assumed that one
OSCAD-CIRAS instance, at minimum, can be implemented in one infrastructure. OSCAD-CIRAS is
able to co-operate with similar systems working in other infrastructures. This co-operation is focused
mainly on communication during the risk management process [2]. The presented experiment concerns
the railway transport CI co-operating with the electricity CI. To simplify the experiment, both CIs are
implemented in one OSCAD-CIRAS.
Risk management items implemented in OSCAD-CIRAS comply with the taxonomy included in
the EC Directive [8], which distinguishes two groups of CIs: ECI (European CI), embraced by the EC
Directive, and others (non-ECI). Assets and other items belonging to the given CI are preceded by a
label being the abbreviation of a CI name: Ele (Electricity), Oil (Oil), Gas (Gas), RoT (Road Transport),
RaT (Rail Transport), AiT (Air Transport), IWT (InlandWaterways Transport), Sea (Ocean and Short-Sea
Shipping and Ports).
Based on the discussed below requirements a structured risk management method was developed
and presented in Subsection 2.4 (Figure 6).
2.3.1. Interdependencies and CI-specific Issues—Input from Resilience Analysis
Critical infrastructure is a complex socio-technical system which interacts with similar systems
working in other application domains. These interactions are considered on different layers (e.g., on the
CI operator layer, sector layer, intra sector layer) [6].
The risk management process should be extended beyond a single infrastructure, because a
hazardous event occurring within the given CI impacts this CI but may also cause problems for other
interacting CIs, and similarly, the given CI may be impacted by hazardous events which occurred in
external CIs. The risk management process should be able to consider interdependencies. This issue
still remains a challenge.
OSCAD-CIRAS does not have a specialized functionality to analyze resilience, including
interdependencies, and for this reason it should be supported externally to get the relevant information.
The resilience analysis, producing necessary input, precedes and supports the risk assessment process.
The first kind of input concerns information about interdependencies obtained from the resilience
analysis, more specifically from its static part focused on the system of systems analysis. During the
dependency analysis [6], the following factors are taken into account:
‚ shared resources, shared services,
‚ common assets, components, policies,
‚ common causes of potential impacts, like: fire, flooding, virus attack, network attack,
communication unavailability.
122
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
Diagrams, called dependency networks are obtained in the course of the interdependency analysis.
The dependency network diagram represents homogenous dependencies between input and output.
It will be shown in Figure 1 by an example related to the CIs presented later in the case study. The left
part presents a scheme of collaborating infrastructures—rail transport (RaT), electricity (Ele) and others.
Figure 1. Two collaborating infrastructures (RaT, Ele) as the validation context—system-of-systems
scheme and dependency network diagram.
The example of a dependency network, presented in the right part of Figure 1, shows that RaT
ECI depends on Ele ECI and vice versa, and, additionally the Gas and Oil infrastructures depend on Ele.
The objective of the method presented here is to distinguish three main categories of impacts
(Figure 1):
‚ CID (CI Degradation) category—different kinds of damages within the given CI;
‚ IE (Internal Escalations)—new internally generated threats or new or increased vulnerabilities
which influence the considered CI, caused by the hazardous event; this allows to consider
secondary effects of the given event;
‚ EE (External Escalations)—generated threats which impact the external CIs, or new or increased
vulnerabilities in the external CIs, caused by the hazardous event.
Please note that the EE category impacts propagate across infrastructures due to existing
dependencies. For example, an impact can propagate from RaT to Ele, from Ele to Gas and to Oil.
The second kind of input from the resilience analysis concerns information about critical risk
scenarios. Please note that the paper presents the typical approach to risk assessment, including the
identification and prioritization of threats, identification of vulnerabilities relevant to these threats and
the impact assessment. This is a relatively simple approach, but it can be unsuccessful if all possible
scenarios are taken into account in the risk management process—only the most critical scenarios are
selected. The dynamic resilience analysis [6], preceding the risk management process, returns these
very critical scenarios, such as the CI collapsing scenarios. It is assumed that to identify these scenarios,
structural analyses of the collaborating CIs and dynamic resilience analyses were made.
123
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
It is assumed for the presented method and tool that the critical scenarios and interdependencies
are known prior to initiating the risk assessment.
Apart from critical scenarios and interdependencies, the resilience analysis provides information
about the most critical nodes, the most vulnerable nodes, strength of coupling between the nodes,
and a lot of other information useful in the risk management process.
2.3.2. Bow-Tie Risk Assessment Concept Implementation
The bow-tie conceptual model [18] embraces both multiple and complex causes of the given
hazardous event and its diversified and multidirectional consequences (impacts). It means that it is
composed of two elements: causes analysis and consequences analysis. These features are the basis for
the method presented here.
The consequences analysis part of the bow-tie model is implemented on the ABIA or PBIA basis.
Later, they are called BIA (in short). For a given asset (process), which is under the hazardous event,
impact can be assessed with the use of the loss matrix.
In OSCAD-CIRAS two causes analyses are possible: AORA or PORA, later called RA (in short).
AORA allows to analyze each threat-vulnerability pair which can breach the given asset, while PORA
does the same with respect to the given process. First, the BIA type analysis is performed, next the RA
analysis (Figure 6).
2.3.3. Critical Infrastructure Risk Register and Related Issues
OSCAD-CIRAS distinguishes primary assets which are to be protected and secondary assets
related to them. For example, RaT:Node, representing the railway node, can be considered a primary
asset. It can be impacted when a hazardous event occurs, for this reason it should be protected.
This complex asset embraces many diversified secondary assets (rails, level crossings, buildings,
signaling equipment, ICT equipment, people, countermeasures, etc.).
The asset destruction implies multidirectional impacts on the CI where the event occurs and on
other, dependent infrastructures. This is a subject of the BIA analysis. For the given protected asset
there are threats and vulnerabilities considered, because they imply hazardous events which may
cause full or partial damages on an asset. This is a subject of the RA analysis.
The risk register contains information about assets (and/or processes) impacted during a hazardous
event, consequences, event frequency, threats, vulnerabilities, and assessed multidirectional impacts.
2.3.4. Risk Measures and the Assessment Process
The measures of multidimensional impacts of the hazardous event, used during BIA analyses,
encompass three above mentioned main categories of impacts (CID, IE, EE). For each of them several
loss categories are defined (four for CID, two for IE, and two for EE—eight categories in total)—see
Figure 2. All categories and their number are user-defined.
􀈱
Figure 2. Event multidirectional impacts measures (CID, IE, EE) in OSCAD-CIRAS [23].
124
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
For all loss categories the same number of loss levels are defined (here: five): from Level 1
(the lower level) to Level 5 (the upper). Each level gets a clear interpretation. This way the loss
matrix, i.e., the basic BIA tool, is defined and shown in Figure 3. The “CID: Economic losses dimension
(Mio Euro)”, “CID: Live and injury dimension” and “CID: Social impact dimension” loss categories
were defined according to the propositions from [4], others by the author.
􀈱
Figure 3. Business loss matrix used for BIA analyses.
The BIA analyzer operates on three main categories of impacts (CID, IE, EE) and their loss
categories shown in Figure 3. For each CID, IE, EE impact category the worst case value of loss
categories is selected as a partial BIA result, marked as CIDval, IEval, and EEval. The BIA aggregated
result, depending on the chosen calculation model, is defined by very simply functions:
‚ for the worst case model (WCM):
BIAvalue “ Worst Case of pCIDval, IEval, EEvalq (1)
‚ for the total model (TM):
BIAvalue “ CIDval ` IEval ` EEval (2)
‚ for the product model (PM):
BIAvalue “ CIDvalˆIEvalˆ EEval (3)
125
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
In the example discussed in the paper, BIA considers three main categories of losses (CID, IE, EE)
and five levels of losses (1 to 5). It means that the range of the BIA aggregated results can be: 1 to 5 for
WCM, 3 to 15 for TM, and 1 to 125 for PM. The kind of the calculation model is configurable. The WCM
model is chosen due to its simplicity.
For the RA analysis the risk value is expressed as:
Risk “ Event likelihoodˆEvent consequences (4)
The RA “Event likelihood” measures, based on [12,18], are presented in Table 1, and their
implementation in the OSCAD-CIRAS dictionary is shown in Figure 4. The number of likelihood
measures is fully configurable – here five levels are assumed.
Table 1. Event likelihood measures.
Level of measure Frequency per year Description
Fairly normal
5 1–10 Event that is expected to occur frequently
Occasional
4 10´1–1
Event that may happen now and then and will normally be
experienced by personnel
Possible
3 10´3–10´1 Rare event, but will be possibly experienced by personnel
Remote
2 10´5–10´3 Very rare event that will not necessarily be experienced in a
similar plant
Improbable
1 0–10´5 Extremely rare event
􀈱
Figure 4. Event likelihood measure in OSCAD-CIRAS [23].
The RA “Event consequences” measures are derived from the loss matrix categories. It is possible
because the BIA analysis precedes the RA one, and the measures of both are harmonized. Table 2 is
an example of mapping the BIA aggregated results (BIAval) on the RA consequences measures with
respect to the used calculation model.
126
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
Table 2. The RA consequences derived from BIA aggregated results depending on the used BIA
calculation model (an example).
RA consequences Mapping the BIA Aggregated Results on the RA Consequences for Different Calculation Models
for Worst Case Model (WCM) for Total Model (TM) for Product Model (PM)
Negligible damage
1 1 3–5 1–25
Minor damage
2 2 6–8 26–49
Major damage
3 3 9–10 50–80
Severe loss
4 4 11–13 81–100
Catastrophic
5 5 14–15 101–125
The contents of Table 2 are implemented in the consequences dictionary (Figure 5). For further BIA
examples the measures with the “WCM_” prefixes are used, and the RA consequences are measured
in the range from 1 to 5.
􀈱
Figure 5. Event consequences measures for different BIA calculation models implemented in the
system dictionaries.
2.4. Risk Assessment Method Implemented in OSCAD-CIRAS
The risk assessment method proposed in the paper takes into account previously specified
requirements, including the CIRAS RRA requirements, and the abilities of the OSCAD software
platform [13].
This method is embedded into the process, which ensures the resilience of the given CI, e.g., RaT
ECI. The general scheme of the risk assessment process is presented in Figure 6. The risk assessment
processes run concurrently in each of the collaborating infrastructures.
The risk assessment process running in the given CI gets from the resilience analysis a set of
basic critical risk scenarios, dependency network diagram and any other risk-relevant information.
There are three risk scenarios repositories:
127
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
‚ for basic risk scenarios, obtained from the resilience analysis;
‚ for externally generated hazards for the given CI; the EE-related risk scenarios are identified
outside the CI;
‚ for internally generated hazards for the given CI, causing secondary impacts (the IE-related
risk scenarios).
The assessment process starts from the basic scenario of the highest criticality obtained from
the resilience analysis. First, BIA (a consequences analysis) is performed, and its results encompass
the following:
‚ CI internal damages (CID)—CIDval,
‚ generated internal hazards (IE)—IEval,
‚ generated external hazards (EE)—EEval.
The aggregated BIA result is identified as the function of CIDval, IEval, EEval, according to the
calculation model (here, for WCM: BIA result is the maximal value of CIDval, IEval, EEval).
Next, RA (a causes analysis) is launched to identify threat/vulnerability pairs leading to the
hazardous event. Their likelihood is assessed. OSCAD requires the event consequences input as
well. In this case, the BIA-derived value is introduced by default. During the risk management
process, the risk is reassessed after the countermeasure implementation (the risk after), and if the
countermeasure affects the event consequences, e.g., data backup, the default value (from BIA) can be
corrected manually.
Figure 6. General scheme of the risk assessment process in a critical infrastructure.
After completing the BIA/RA pair, its results are analyzed. When the EE impact occurs,
the warning about the generated hazard (embracing causes and consequences: new threats and/or
increased vulnerabilities, external impact, risk and impact values, etc.) is formed as the EE-related
risk scenario and sent to the potentially impacted CI to be considered in the risk assessment process.
The risk communication process (an important part of the whole CIs risk management framework) is
128
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
responsible for exchanging such warnings between the collaborating and dependent infrastructures.
This EE-related risk scenario is placed in the external hazards repository of the warned CI.
Next, the IE impact is analyzed. When the impact occurs, the IE-related risk scenario is defined
(a record embracing the causes and consequences: new threats and/or increased vulnerabilities within
the considered CI, secondary impact, risk and impact values, etc.) and added to the internal hazards
repository. Moreover, this newly generated internal hazard is assessed (BIA-RA). This secondary effect
may cause new secondary internal damages (CID), an external impact (an additional EE-related risk
scenario) as well as a new IE-related risk scenario, which is placed in the repository and then analyzed
(BIA/RA). These analyses focus on internal escalation and are repeated until no internal secondary
effects occur. Then, the next basic risk scenario is taken into account and analyzed in the same way.
When all basic scenarios are finished, next the hazards externally generated for this CI are analyzed
similarly as the basic ones. The whole process stops when all basic and externally generated for this CI
are analyzed.
2.5. Scenario of the Validation Experiment
The validation deals with the railway and energy collaborating infrastructures and encompasses
one basic risk scenario: a catastrophe in an important railway node. To simplify the experiment,
both CIs are analyzed in the same OSCAD-CIRAS. They are distinguished by prefixes RaT and Ele.
Let us assume that this critical risk scenario is downloaded from the basic repository for the risk
assessment process.
Figure 7 shows four pairs of analyses of the validation experiment. Each pair, composed with
BIA-RA, represents a bow-tie idea. The following numeration rule of the particular pairs of analyses
is assumed: the basic scenario (called here the 1st iteration) has no postfix, for the second, third, etc.,
expressing the escalated impacts, the iteration number is followed by a postfix expressing the kind of
impact (ie, ee), i.e., 1, 2ie, 2ee, and 3ee.
Figure 7. Validation scenario shown with the use of the bow-tie concept.
129
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
The scenario is initiated by the event trigger which occurred in the RaT:Node (please note the
naming convention: CIname:AssetName) primary asset and caused a hazardous event, e.g., intentional
derailment seriously impacting the railway node area.
1st iteration
The “1 BIA(RaT:Node)” analysis identifies multidimensional impacts of this event. Please note
that the impacted asset or process is within the brackets. The internal degradation (mostly financial
consequences) which is caused by an intentional derailment is assessed (CID). BIA proves that
this event:
‚ impacts the external infrastructure Ele as the coal transport for the power plant is stopped for a
long time (EE-related risk scenario generated); normally this should imply sending this scenario to
OSCAD-CIRAS working in Ele CI, but here both CIs are simulated in one OSCAD-CIRAS instance;
‚ breaches the security zone (countermeasure) which is a secondary asset of RaT:Node; IE-related
risk scenario is generated and placed in the internal repository.
The “1 RA(RaT:Node)” analysis identifies causes of the hazardous event and the related risk.
Because secondary effects are revealed, they should be further analyzed, causing the next iteration,
instead of taking a new basic scenario.
2nd iteration
Due to the external escalation (EE), extra analyses for Ele CI (energy production in the power
plant) are performed:
‚ “2ee BIA(Ele:Energy)” identifies the CI degradation caused by an externally generated threat;
it does not identify any internal impacts (IE), but identifies backward external impacts to the RaT
infrastructure (energy provision for the RaT:Energy); this implies the 3rd iteration;
‚ “2ee RA(Ele:Energy production process)” identifies how coal delivery disturbance impacts the
energy production process (here the process-oriented approach is applied).
Due to the internal escalation (IE), extra analyses of the security zone are needed:
‚ “2ie BIA(RaT:NodeÑSecurity zone)”,
‚ “2ie RA(RaT:NodeÑSecurity zone)”.
Please note that a secondary asset is preceded by “Ñ”. The related BIA identifies secondary CI
degradation caused by a breach in the security zone (here: theft) but does not identify any further IE
or EE impacts.
3rd iteration
Due to the external threat generated by Ele for RaT:Energy, two extra analyses are performed:
‚ “3ee BIA(RaT:Energy)”,
‚ “3ee RA(RaT:Energy)”.
The additional CI internal degradation is assessed, and no internal/external escalations are
detected. In the 3rd iteration both RaT and Ele infrastructures achieve a stable state and therefore no
further analyses are needed. Particular analyses were performed during the validation process.
2.6. Running the Validation Experiment
The validation experiment embraces eight analyses (four BIA, four RA) performed in
OSCAD-CIRAS according to the scenario shown in Figure 7.
The left side of Figure 8 presents the OSCAD-CIRAS menu/submenu depending on the context
of the operation, here: risk analyses. The right part shows all performed analyses, their status,
130
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
and risk acceptance parameters (not discussed here). It is an entry point to view/modify the details of
each analysis.
􀈱
Figure 8. OSCAD-CIRAS presenting performed analyses.
The four of eight performed analyses are exemplified in the following subsections.
2.6.1. Identifying Impact of the Railway Node Crash—“1 BIA(RaT:Node)”
This BIA analysis assesses multidirectional impacts when the railway node crashes.
“1 BIA(RaT:Node)” embraces three main impact categories, represented by three OSCAD-CIRAS
tabs: CID (Figure 9), EE (Figure 10), IE (Figure 11).
􀈱
Figure 9. The BIA analysis for the railway node—internal degradation tab.
131
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
􀈱
Figure 10. The BIA analysis for the railway node—external escalation tab.
􀈱
Figure 11. The BIA analysis for the railway node—internal escalation tab.
The tool offers a possibility to assess CID-type losses in a certain number (here: five) of time
horizons (Figure 9). Please note that CIDval = 4 (worst case value).
Figure 10 presents the assessment of the external impact of the crash in the railway
node. The disturbance in the Ele critical infrastructure is possible because coal transport failed
(limited production, network overloading). Please note that EEval = 2.
Figure 11 presents the assessment of the internal impact of the crash in the railway node. The crash
may breach the node protection system (security zone, CCTV) raising vulnerabilities to other threats.
This may cause negative secondary effects. Please note that IEval = 2.
Assuming that the worst case model is used, BIAvalue = max(4,2,2) = 4.
2.6.2. Causes of the Railway Node Crash—“1 RA(RaT:Node)”
Figure 12 exemplifies the “1 RA(RaT:Node)” analysis, mentioned in the validation scenario
(Figure 7). Apart from the train derailment (a green frame), some other node risk scenarios are listed,
like: manipulation in the train depot, power supply failure, theft of equipment, but they are not
discussed here.
132
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
􀈱
Figure 12. The RA analysis for the railway node.
The event triggered in the railway node is classified as “intentional derailment”. The derailment
is possible due to the following exploited vulnerabilities:
‚ “Large areas and facilities” of the railway node – difficult to monitor,
‚ “Insufficient infrastructure protection”,
‚ “Low awareness”.
For each pair threat-vulnerability the risk is assessed. Each pair has consequences from BIA
(BIAvalue = 4). Please note the pair: “Derailment—intentional”—“Large areas and facilities”.
The implementation of the countermeasures package (security zone, CCTV cameras, additional
fences, police guards), not shown here, decreases the likelihood from “Possible” (3) to “Remote” (2),
with the same consequences (4), and the risk from 12 to 8 (max. value is 5 ˆ 5 = 25.0). Please note
that the countermeasures cost rises from 69,000 Euros to 212,000 Euros (for the given package of
countermeasures the cost is assigned).
Certain parameters, like countermeasure class or implementation level, are not used in the paper.
2.6.3. Causes of Breaching the Node Security Zone—“2ie RA(RaT:NodeÑSecurity Zone)”
During the IE assessment (Figure 11) a breach of the node security zone was identified implying
two analyses:
‚ “2ie BIA(RaT:Node ÑSecurity zone)”—to assess impact related to this event, like: “Significant
financial losses possible in case of long-lasting disturbance in functioning of security zone”, neither
IE nor EE are detected—BIA not shown;
‚ “2ie RA (RaT:Node ÑSecurity zone)”—presented in Figure 13.
􀈱
Figure 13. The RA analysis for the breached security zone.
The breached security zone becomes more vulnerable because the CCTV system was damaged
and the node was not properly watched due to the recovery process in the node (resources shortage).
For this reason, unauthorized access is more realistic.
133
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
Please note that the security zone plays twofold role, therefore in the system dictionary a special
category A = C (Asset as countermeasure) was defined.
The security zone is a barrier, a countermeasure, and an asset belonging to the set of assets
representing the railway node. In OSCAD-CIRAS it is possible to asses risk for this node similarly to
other assets.
2.6.4. Identifying Impact of Energy Delivery Disturbance—“2ee BIA (Ele:Energy)”
While EE was assessed for the basic scenario (Figure 10), the disturbance of the fuel (coal) delivery
for the power plant was detected, implying two other analyses to be done for the Ele infrastructure:
‚ “2ee BIA(Ele:Energy)” was made, which revealed the possibility of the energy delivery problem
(Figure 14); this may impact railways, therefore “3ee BIA(RaT:Energy)” and “3ee RA(RaT:Energy)”
are launched (not shown).
‚ “2ee RA(Ele:Energy)”; the process-oriented risk analysis (PORA) is applied to exemplify that
the process approach is possible in OSCAD-CIRAS; the analysis is focused on the causes of the
“Energy production process in the power plant” disturbance.
􀈱
Figure 14. BIA for the energy asset provided by the power plant (EE tab).
The implied, but not shown here “3ee BIA (RaT:Energy)” and “3ee RA (RaT:Energy)” conclude
that the disturbance of the railway energy system can be serious, still the probability is low thanks to
the implemented redundancy.
Please note that the event “Energy delivery problem” can be considered a common cause event,
because it impacts all energy dependent infrastructures. The validation scenario is simplified and
considers only one dependent infrastructure (RaT).
3. Results and Discussion
The paper presents the validation experiment related to risk management in critical infrastructures
with the use of the ready-made OSCAD software platform adapted for this application domain as the
OSCAD-CIRAS tool.
To develop this CI-dedicated experimental tool, the following input was considered:
‚ the general requirements for the CI risk manager [12], elaborated on the basis of publications,
laws, standards and tool reviews,
‚ the CIRAS project requirements.
The objective was to perform a case study and to acquire knowledge for the CIRAS project.
The question is to what extent the requirements are satisfied by OSCAD-CIRAS, i.e., whether
OSCAD-CIRAS is able to work as the risk reduction assessment (RRA) component within the CIRAS
Tool. The ready-made OSCAD was configured, equipped with the domain data (dictionaries, measures,
134
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
different parameters, etc.), and the validation was performed according to the elaborated plan. As a
result, the OSCAD-CIRAS experimentation tool was worked out.
3.1. Meeting Basic Requirements
Reviewing the basic requirements (Section 2.1.), the following conclusions are possible.
(1) OSCAD-CIRAS takes into account the CI specific phenomena, such as common cause failures,
cascading and escalating effects, as well as interdependencies between CIs, though OSCAD-CIRAS
should be supported by a resilience analysis. During the validation experiment it was shown that
OSCAD-CIRAS is able to consider the following:
‚ common cause initiating events; for the given hazardous event BIA is able to detect hazardous
events, that are implied by the given hazardous event, in all dependent infrastructures by
generating many outgoing EE-related risk scenarios; this possibility was mentioned in Figure 14
(Ele => RaT, Ele => Oil, Ele => Gas) but was shown only for one dependency path (Ele => RaT);
‚ cascade initiating events; apart from internally triggered hazardous events, the RA analysis
considers external triggers incoming from other infrastructures as the incoming EE-related risk
scenarios; the considered impacted CI depends on infrastructures which generate these scenarios;
this possibility is represented by the following analyses:
‚ “2ee RA(Ele:Energy)”—a coal delivery problem may disturb the energy production process;
‚ “3ee RA (RaT:Energy)”—an energy delivery problem may disturb railway transport;
‚ cascade resulting events; BIA is able to detect any hazardous event resulting from
the original event which impacts a dependent infrastructure; this was represented by:
“1 BIA(RaT:Node)”/Figure 10, “2ee BIA(Ele:Energy)”/Figure 14 and “3ee BIA (RaT:Energy)”
(not shown);
‚ escalating events; BIA performed in the first infrastructure is able to detect a hazardous event
in the second impacted dependent infrastructure, and BIA performed for the second impacted
infrastructure is able to detect a hazardous event in the third infrastructure, and so on; this was
exemplified by the analysis chain for RaT => Ele => RaT (Figure 7—a red line).
(2) The bow-tie concept embracing the analysis of consequences and causes was implemented as
the pairs of the RA-BIA analyses. It was exemplified by the analyses chain shown in Figure 7. Usually
BIA precedes RA.
(3) The risk register is represented by the OSCAD-CIRAS data (assets—primary and secondary,
processes, threats, vulnerabilities, risk scenarios, countermeasures, etc.)—some data are predefined
(dictionaries), some created during the performed analyses.
(4) Risk measures are configurable: categories of losses, number of loss levels and their
interpretation, number of time horizons, likelihood levels and their interpretation, e.g., in the frequency
domain, calculation models and formulas for risk assessment.
3.2. Meeting CIRAS Project Requirements
As for the CIRAS project requirements (Section 2.1), the following conclusions are possible.
(1) OSCAD-CIRAS is able:
‚ to assess risk before a measure is implemented and reassess the risk for a certain number of
security measures alternatives considered for implementation,
‚ to take into account cost-benefits factors and qualitative criteria dealing with the security
measures alternatives.
The validation scenario, simplified for the purposes of this article, was focused on the risk
assessment before the countermeasure was implemented. However, the selection of measures in
OSCAD-CIRAS, which is a part of the risk management process, needs additional explanation.
135
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
Figure 15 shows an example of security measures selection (the example slightly differs from the
validation example) for the given threat-vulnerability pair. It is assumed that the “risk before” the
measures implementation was assessed earlier (Current state tab). The decision maker who selects
countermeasures for implementation may define several security measures alternatives (here three,
marked A, B, C). Each alternative represents a coherent package of countermeasures, with their risk,
cost, benefits, qualitative criteria and other parameters. Then the most advantageous alternative is
selected for implementation.
􀈱
Figure 15. OSCAD-CIRAS risk manager—considering security measures alternatives.
To support the decision maker in this process, some aggregated data from RRA, CBA and QCA
are available on diagrams (note the button “Comparison of security measures alternatives”, marked by
the red frame). An example of a diagram, related to CBA parameters, is shown in Figure 16. Please note
other tabs.
􀈱
Figure 16. OSCAD-CIRAS risk manager—considering external cost-benefit parameters.
136
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
More detailed graphs, tables, reports related to particular alternatives will be available from
the CIRAS tool level. Currently they are under development. OSCAD-CIRAS is able to exchange
(through developed web services) information with the CBA and QCA components during the decision
process dealing with the security measures selection
(2) Other issues related to the project requirements were discussed previously, like the ability to
consider the CI specific phenomena and cross-sectoral dependencies, to analyze causes and impacts of
hazardous events, and to manage the risk register data.
Reassuming, the validation process is based on the planned scenario which encompasses two
critical infrastructures: railway transport (RaT) and electricity provision (Ele). Two kinds of escalation
effects are demonstrated:
‚ those propagated through a CI internal path,
‚ those propagated through a path crossing one or more CIs.
The consequences of hazardous events in a given CI can impact the same CI again and/or the
neighboring CIs, creating a complex sequence of impacts. The presented method allows to identify:
‚ direct consequences occurring within the considered infrastructure (called here: CI degradation);
‚ secondary effects caused by breaching internal barriers (CI safeguards) and occurring in this CI
as the consequences of a hazardous event (called here: internal escalation); this escalation can
propagate further causing additional hazardous events—internal or external;
‚ secondary effects occurring in the external CIs as the consequences of a hazardous event
(called here: external escalation); they can propagate further, impacting other CIs or generating
internal escalations.
The scenario depends on the new risks identified during the analysis. The presented method
assumes (in the loss matrix for BIA analyses) that a new hazardous event (internal or external) can
be triggered as a consequence of a previous hazardous event. Internally triggered events result from
breaching the CI internal barriers. Events triggered within the external CIs can propagate thanks to
existing CI interdependencies. The risk assessment results give information if the hazardous event will
propagate internally and/or externally, or nowhere. It means that each risk situation may drive quite a
different scenario in the same set of infrastructures. If, during the analysis of infrastructure A, it was
detected that a breach in infrastructure B is possible (EE), then the risk analysis in infrastructure B is
needed and will be added to the risk analyses scenario. Otherwise, the analysis in infrastructure B will
not be added to this scenario. If, during the analysis of infrastructure A, it was detected that a security
barrier can be breached (IE), then the analysis in infrastructure A is needed and will be added to the
risk analyses scenario. Otherwise, it will not be added to this scenario.
For this reason, each scenario is here called a risk-driven scenario. It is assumed that
interdependencies are known—all paths with possible propagation of impacts are known.
4. Conclusions
The objective of the paper is to develop a structured risk management method for critical
infrastructures, embedded into the CI resilience process (Figure 6). The method distinguishes three
categories of impacts composed into the BIA loss matrix:
‚ CID (direct CI degradation),
‚ IE (escalation by breaching internal security barriers),
‚ EE (escalation by breaching security barriers in external CIs).
The method is based on the commonly used risk management methodology, though it was
enhanced by three above mentioned features which allowed to take into account the following issues
(Section 3):
137
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
‚ how a hazardous event which occurred in the given CI impacts the dependent CIs; this allows to
consider common cause initiating events, cascade resulting events, externally escalating events;
‚ how a hazardous event which occurred in external CIs impacts the given CI; this allows to consider
cascade initiating events, externally escalating events;
‚ secondary impacts of a hazardous event which occurred in the given CI and lead to an internal
escalation; this allows to analyze breaches in the multilayered protection system.
There are some extra features which make it possible to assess a critical infrastructure degradation
in several time horizons (CID-type consequences). In addition, they can assess several security
measures packages with respect to the risk reduction ability.
To elaborate, implement and validate this method, the research includes as well:
‚ the identification of CI domain-related data, like assets, processes, threats, vulnerabilities, common
used countermeasures, etc., and put them into the OSCAD system dictionaries,
‚ the risk parameters definition, i.e.,: scales of measures for likelihood, consequences, impacts
categories and levels, loss matrix, calculation formulas configuration,
‚ the planning of the validation scenario (to be simple enough and be able to exemplify all features
of the elaborated method),
‚ performing validation to assess the feasibility of the proposed solution.
The paper gives substantial contribution to the CIRAS project. The aim of the research presented
in the paper is to acquire knowledge about the shape of the key component responsible for risk
assessment (RRA) of the CIRAS Tool. The case study was based on the ready-made business
continuity/information security management OSCAD software. During the research this software
was adapted to the critical infrastructure application domain, according to the identified requirements.
This way the dedicated OSCAD-CIRAS tool was developed. The near real data were prepared for the
critical infrastructure domain and the software was configured. According to the planned validation
scenario, the risk assessment within two collaborating infrastructures (railway, energy) was studied.
The case study gives information how to use OSCAD-CIRAS in the CIRAS project. The results of
research confirm that OSCAD-CIRAS can be applied as the RRA component.
The acquired knowledge was used by the CIRAS project team. Currently all components
(RRA, CBA, QCA) are integrated into the CIRAS Tool. The case study described in the paper is
the basis for two CIRAS project use cases.
The CIRAS project considerably extends the risk reduction assessment by additional CBA
(cost-benefits) and QCA (vague factors) assessments to obtain a full risk picture for the decision maker.
Acknowledgments: The author thanks his Colleagues from the CIRAS project consortium for reviewing this paper
and discussing the presented concept. The author is grateful for their assistance during the OSCAD customization
(installation, logo edition, preparing the OSCAD dictionaries).
Author Contributions: The presented validation experiment represent the author’s own research.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest. The OSCAD is owned by the Institute of
Innovative Technologies EMAG. This project has been funded with support from the European Commission.
This publication reflects the views only of the author, and the European Commission cannot be held responsible for
any use which may be made of the information contained therein (obligatory for each paper concerning CIRAS).
References and Notes
1. Eusgeld, I.; Nan, C.; Dietz, S. “System-of-systems” approach for interdependent critical infrastructures.
Reliab. Eng. Syst. Saf. 2011, 96, 679–686. [CrossRef]
2. ISO. Risk management—Principles and guidelines; ISO 31000:2009; International Organization for
Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2009.
138
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
3. IEC/ISO. Risk Management—Risk Assessment Techniques; IEC 31010:2009; International Electrotechnical
Commission (in cooperation with ISO): Geneva, Switzerland, 2009.
4. Hokstad, P.; Utne, I.B.; Vatn, J. Risk and Interdependencies in Critical Infrastructures: A Guideline for Analysis,
Reliability Engineering; Springer-Verlag: London, UK, 2012.
5. Rinaldi, S.M.; Peerenboom, J.P.; Kelly, T.K. Identifying, Understanding and Analyzing Critical Infrastructure
Interdependencies. IEEE Control Syst. Mag. 2001, 21, 11–25. [CrossRef]
6. Giannopoulos, G.; Filippini, R. Risk Assessment and Resilience for Critical Infrastructures.
In Proceedings of Workshop Proceedings, Ispra, Italy, 25–26 April 2012; Available online:
http://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC71923 (accessed on 29 February 2016).
7. Min, H.-S. J.; Beyeler, W.; Brown, T.; Jun Son, Y.; Jones, A.T. Toward modelling and simulation of critical
national infrastructure interdependencies. IIE Trans. 2007, 39, 57–71. [CrossRef]
8. The Council of the European Union. Council Directive 2008/114/EC—on the identification and designation
of European critical infrastructures and the assessment of the need to improve their protection. 2008.
Available online: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32008L0114 (accessed
on 29 February 2016).
9. European Commission. Commission Staff Working Document—on a new approach to the European
Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection Making European Critical Infrastructures more secure. 2013.
Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/20130828_epcip_commission
_staff_working_document.pdf (accessed on 29 February 2016).
10. CIRAS project web site. Available online: http://cirasproject.eu/content/project-topic (accessed on
22 December 2015).
11. ValueSec FP7 project web site. Available online: www.valuesec.eu (accessed on 22 December 2015).
12. Bialas, A. Critical infrastructures risk manager—the basic requirements elaboration. In Theory and
Engineering of Complex Systems and Dependability; Zamojski,W., Mazurkiewicz, J., Sugier, J.,Walkowiak, T.,
Kacprzyk, J., Eds.; Springer-Verlag: Cham, Switzerland; Heidelberg, Germany; New York, NY, USA;
Dordrecht, The Netherland; London, UK, 2015; pp. 11–24.
13. EMAG. OSCAD project web site. Available online: http://www.oscad.eu/index.php/en/ (accessed on
21 December 2015).
14. Giannopoulos, G.; Filippini, R.; Schimmer, M. Risk Assessment Methodologies for Critical Infrastructure
Protection—Part I: A State of the Art; Publications Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2012.
15. European Commission. EURACOM Deliverable D20: Final Publishable Summary, Version: D20.1. 2011.
Available online: http://cordis.europa.eu/result/rcn/57042_en.html (accessed on 21 December 2015).
16. ENISA. Inventory of Risk Management/Risk Assessment Methods and Tools. Available online:
http://rm-inv.enisa.europa.eu/methods (accessed on 21 December 2015).
17. Baginski, J.; Bialas, A.; Rogowski, D.; Flisiuk, B.; (Institute of Innovative Technologies EMAG, Katowice,
Poland); Martin, J.; Garcia, A.; (ATOS S.A., Madrid, Spain); Klein, P.; (Center for European Security Strategies,
Munich, Germany). State of the Art of Methods and Tools. 2015.
18. Rausand, M. Risk Assessment: Theory, Methods, and Applications. In Statistics in Practice; Wiley: Hoboken,
NJ, USA, 2011.
19. Białas, A. Risk assessment aspects in mastering the value function of security measures. In New
Results in Dependability and Computer Systems; Zamojski, W., Mazurkiewicz, J., Sugier, J., Walkowiak, T.,
Kacprzyk, J., Eds.; Springer-Verlag: Cham, Switzerland; Heidelberg, Germany; New York, NY, USA;
Dordrecht, The Netherland; London, UK, 2013.
20. Bialas, A. Computer support for the railway safety management system—first validation results.
In Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing; Zamojski,W., Mazurkiewicz, J., Sugier, J.,Walkowiak, T.,
Kacprzyk, J., Eds.; Springer-Verlag: Cham, Switzerland; Heidelberg, Germany; New York, NY, USA;
Dordrecht, The Netherland; London, UK, 2014.
21. Białas, A. Business continuity management, information security and assets management in mining.
Mechanizacja i Automatyzacja Górnictwa 2013, 8, 125–138. Available online: http://yadda.icm.edu.pl/yadda/
element/bwmeta1.element.baztech-891910b0-6f4e-4dfb-8bc3-345d940cc88b?q=fd72cbbb-7631-435b-9e4e-cf0b
5ebdcc38$4&qt=IN_PAGE (accessed on 29 February 2016).
139
Sustainability 2016, 8, 240
22. OSCAD-CIRAS. Available online on request using the author’s e-mail.
23. Białas, A. Experimentation tool for critical infrastructures risk management. In Proceedings of the
2015 Federated Conference on Computer Science and Information Systems (FedCSIS), Lodz, Poland,
13–16 September 2015.
© 2016 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
140
sustainability
Article
Opportunities for Cross-Border Entrepreneurship
Development in a Cluster Model Exemplified by the
Polish–Czech Border Region
Joanna Kurowska-Pysz
Management and Engineering Production Department, University of Da˛browa Górnicza, Str. Cieplaka 1c,
41-300 Da˛browa Górnicza, Poland; jkurowska@wsb.edu.pl; Tel.: +48-602-231-123
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 31 December 2015; Accepted: 18 February 2016; Published: 2 March 2016
Abstract: The subject of the paper is the analysis and evaluation of cross-border entrepreneurship
development opportunities on the basis of cross-border cooperation, which has gradually evolved
from consisting of bilateral partnerships to a networking model or even a cluster. The study
conducted at the Polish–Czech border area indicates that, in terms of the development of cross-border
cooperation, the economic sphere is lagging far behind social activities such as culture, education
and tourism. At the same time, Polish and Czech enterprises are not sufficiently mobilized to
develop cross-border entrepreneurship, although a number of support instruments in this regard
have been proposed. Sustainable development of the border should take into account both social
and economic aspects. An important research problem therefore becomes determining the possibility
of boosting the development of cross-border entrepreneurship on the basis of the existing forms
of cross-border cooperation, including cooperation in the social sphere. The aim of this paper is
to define the conditions and opportunities for the development of cluster cooperation in the area
of cross-border entrepreneurship. The author has attempted to resolve whether the intensity of
cross-border cooperation can be a factor which mobilizes companies to develop their cross-border
entrepreneurship and whether cross-border entrepreneurship can be further developed within the
cluster model.
Keywords: sustainable development of the border region; cross-border cooperation; cross-border
entrepreneurship; partnerships; cluster
1. Introduction
Processes occurring in the world economy have a significant impact on the functioning of
enterprises, regardless of the scale of their business activity. Increased globalization favours the
expansion of large transnational corporations, whereas simultaneously in the economy, there are
many mechanisms stimulating the development of small and medium-sized businesses. Smaller
enterprises, mostly operating on a regional or local scale, also have good prospects on the market,
and also show a tendency for integration (also with larger companies), for example as clusters [1].
Clusters are a form of partnership aimed at developing cooperation between enterprises, but also
local governments, academic institutions and business environment institutions, located in immediate
geographical proximity and representing related sectors. These two strategic conditions are necessary
to form appropriately strong bonds between the participants of a cluster.
An impulse for the development of any form of cooperation, including cooperation within the
clusters, can be both the needs and expectations of interested entities as well as external factors
encouraging integration. Particularly favourable system conditions, aiding the development of
cooperation, are created in border regions. In contrast to many well-developed border towns in
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230; doi:10.3390/su8030230 141 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
Western Europe or East Asia, Eastern Europe border regions are developing rather poorly, especially
in economic and social terms. They are disadvantaged and at risk of marginalization, requiring
special support. The reason is certainly the geopolitical situation in the communist bloc, which has
pursued a specific policy of borderland development. Until the fall of the communist bloc, obtaining
a passport was only possible for some citizens cooperating with the authorities. Until Poland and
the Czech Republic joined the Schengen Zone on 21 December 2007, each crossing of the border was
associated with the control of documents. Before freely crossing the border was allowed, the border
area, as a militarily strategic zone, was excluded from priority economic and social investments, and
it was patrolled by the army in the large part. In a social sense, crossing the border was seen as an
extraordinary necessity, not as a privilege of border residents and other citizens. This possibility was
exploited only in specific situations. The border was therefore divided and not united, which at present
means the process of cross-border cooperation between Poland and the Czech Republic, despite its
undeniable dynamism, is not progressing as fast as in other regions of the world.
Integration activities, stimulating the development of border areas, are undertaken both
at the level of the European Union, as well as individually by neighbouring member states,
which are in favour of cross-border business development and socio-economic integration of the
neighbouring communities.
So far, in cross-border cooperation, both in terms of social as well as economic cooperation,
bilateral partnerships are the dominant type of cooperation existing between local governments
and NGOs, and occur much less frequently between enterprises. There is no doubt that bilateral
cooperation between the same partners continuing for a long time strengthens cross-border relations,
yet does not fully serve the development of border areas. In order to effectively counteract the
development-related problems of these areas, it is both necessary to form new partnerships between
entities that have not worked together before as well as develop networking opportunities. Currently,
most examples of networking occur in the social sphere whereas at the economic level they occur
only occasionally. In order to balance this trend, it is necessary to define mechanisms to encourage
cross-border entrepreneurship development and economic cooperation of a networking nature that
could develop as clusters.
Analysis of cooperative relations occurring in the borderland has encouraged the author to
consider the opportunities for cluster cooperation development in these areas. It is fostered by both
a natural tendency for cross-border integration, as well as the external conditions, resulting among
other factors from the socio-economic policy of neighbouring border regions and the European Union's
system support, e.g., in the form of the INTERREG VA 2014-2020 funds [2].
The aim of the paper is to define the conditions and possibilities for the development of cluster
cooperation in the area of cross-border entrepreneurship. An example of Polish–Czech cross-border
cooperation between Silesian Voivodeship (Poland) and the Moravian-Silesian Region (Czech Republic)
was used to measure the level of development of cross-border entrepreneurship. The author has
attempted to resolve whether the intensity of cross-border cooperation can be a factor that mobilizes
businesses to develop their cross-border entrepreneurship and whether cross-border entrepreneurship
can thrive in the cluster model.
In the studied area, qualitative research was conducted: desk research and quantitative research
involving IDI, CATI, CAWI and CATI and PAPI data collection methods. In this paper, the author
used qualitative research (IDI), implemented in 2014 by the TRITIA association and the Regional
Development Agency in Ostrava, on a sample of 30 Polish and Czech companies. Research topics
related to the motives and the process of the development of cross-border entrepreneurship and other
conditions related to their activities at the border. As part of this study, several case studies were
undertaken of companies developing their cross-border entrepreneurship, including the company
run by the author in the field of consulting. In addition to these studies, the author has used her own
research conducted by means of the CATI method with 14 companies from the voivodeship of Silesia
and the Moravian country, identifying their level of interest in cross-border entrepreneurship, as well
142
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
as their opinions about the barriers and benefits related to it. In order to identify potential regional
specializations which can form the basis for the development of future cross-border clusters, the author
also used her own qualitative research conducted in the years 2014–2015, including:
- survey methods such as: CATI, CASI and CAWI on a group of 466 Polish local government units
and 199 Czech local government units for assessing the current state of Polish–Czech border
cooperation, identification of factors shaping the development of this cooperation, the projected
directions of this cooperation and the main actors of this cooperation,
- survey using PAPI method, giving the possibility of creating in Polish-Czech Euroregion Cieszyn
Silesia—of a cross-border cluster in cultural and creative industries, which covered a total
of 40 entities from Poland and the Czech Republic, declaring their intention to strengthen
cross-border cooperation, including 18 Polish and Czech companies. These studies related to the
nature and extent of cooperation with the entities in the neighboring country, the key benefits of
cluster cooperation in the field of culture and creative industries as well as barriers to this process.
Conclusions from the study will serve as recommendations for entities responsible for cross-border
cooperation policy (e.g., regional governments, business environment institutions) whose task is to
create good conditions for the development of cross-border entrepreneurship.
2. Cross-Border Territorial Partnerships as a Form of Inter-Organisational Cooperation in the
Border Regions
Territorial partnership is voluntary and is based on the agreement between at least three
partners representing at least two of the three sectors: public, private and non-governmental.
These partners maintain autonomy and jointly implement long-term measures for the benefit of
a specific region. Within the framework of cooperation, they improve and monitor the partnership and
maintain the principle of equality in the sharing of resources, responsibilities, risks and benefits [3].
The development of territorial partnerships in the 1980s contributed to the popularization of the
local resources management model, involving—among others—the creation of more or less formal
organizations uniting representatives of public, private and non-governmental sectors in a specific
area [4,5]. Partnerships also developed through the process of European integration and the support
of cross-border cooperation, as well as the pursuit to strengthen the competitiveness of peripheral and
marginalized areas. Territorial partnerships bear a reference to cross-border cooperation.
The definition of cross-border cooperation was provided in the European Charter for Border
and Cross-Border Regions (1981) [6], the European Outline Convention on Transfrontier Cooperation
between Territorial Communities or Authorities (1980) [7] and the European Charter of Regional
Self-Government (1997) [8]. Generally, it can be stated that cross-border cooperation is one of the
forms of territorial cooperation of different types of units in the border regions, which might be
related to all areas, including entrepreneurship. A common historical origin and other important
similarities between neighbouring areas on the borderland (e.g., linguistic, cultural, constitutional,
social or economic) may aid in joining forces to achieve common development goals.
Cross-border cooperation applies equally to the activities of local authorities at various levels,
as well as to joint initiatives, e.g., non-governmental organizations or businesses. It aims to create
cooperation networks at local and regional levels, as a result of which cooperation on economic matters
can be fostered, while cultural and social barriers in local communities disappear [9].
The issue of partnerships was recognized, among others, in the regulation of EU structural
funds [10]. Traditionally, partnerships are a mechanism for the transfer of development policy to lower
levels of the hierarchy (top down policy). Partnerships are also agreements of entities at different levels
of the hierarchy, providing interested parties with influence and participation in the development
processes, both initiated at the lowest levels of cooperation (bottom up policy), as well as arranged at
higher levels (as mentioned above, top down policy) [11].
The principles of entering into cross-border partnerships have been stipulated in the Council
Regulation (EC) No. 1083/2006. Each country, depending on its needs and legislative capabilities,
143
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
enters into partnerships with public authorities at various levels, or with other entities, including
NGOs, which can act as economic and social partners [12].
Currently, partnership is most commonly associated with various forms of cooperation
between institutions, entities and individuals in the implementation of common social, economic or
environmental goals. The essence of partnership consists in finalizing an agreement (but also civil law
or association agreement) by entities, institutions, organizations and individuals aimed at engaging
all the concerned parties in actions aimed at optimal use of the available resources and stimulating
multi-dimensional development, using various tools and cooperation mechanisms. The consequence
of the concluded agreement is to undertake joint ventures (projects, programs) of a different nature,
enabling achievement of common objectives.
An example of cross-border partnership are Euroregions—associations operating in the
borderlands of two or more countries, specializing in cross-border cooperation [13]. The main aim of
their activities is the removal of socio-economic inequalities, solving the problems of disadvantaged
and peripheral areas, building mutual trust and cooperation across borders [14] as well as promoting
cross-border entrepreneurship development and integration in other fields, e.g., education [15]. Such
goals are pursued by Euroregion Cieszyn Silesia. This forum of cooperation covers the border areas of
the Silesian Voivodeship (Poland) and the Moravian-Silesian Region (Czech Republic). In the Polish
and Czech part, there are two associations whose members are municipalities, NGOs and enterprises
engaged in Euroregion activity. Both active associations and their members have undertaken a
series of cross-border projects, some of which were carried out with the support of European Union
structural funds [16]. However, in the period following the completion of these projects, cooperation
was continued and further developed [17]. An example of such integration trends, based on the
implementation of earlier EU projects may be, among others, interest in creating a cross-border culture
cluster in the Euroregion Cieszyn Silesia. It is one of the examples of partnership activities, consisting
in the creation of local network structures or a cluster, based on the cooperation of persons, entities
and institutions interested in the development of a given territory.
However, increasing trends to further strengthen cross-border relations to form a cluster can be
observed, which allow for a departure from bilateral cooperation to multilateral interaction between
the main actors in the cluster. Sectoral clusters are among the inter-organizational networks, which
involve the transfer of knowledge [18] and other flows (material or information), as well as the
development of relationships (formal and informal), of which the most important are social. In the
networks of cooperation, the participation of enterprises, research units, administration [19], civil
society and those responsible for environmental issues [20] is necessary. Due to the institutional and
social nature of clusters, official relationships overlap here both structurally (between the cooperating
parties) and organically (between the people involved in the cooperation). Another aspect is that
friendly, neutral as well as hostile or competitive relationships [21] can form in the cluster. The number
of links, the types of actors and the industry specializations of the cluster have been captured by
M. Hennning, J. Moodysson and M. Nilsson [22]. They emphasized how important it is to direct
cross-organizational cooperation, including clustering, according to regional specializations. This leads
to the involvement of entities responsible for shaping regional policy, going beyond the typical areas
of clusters’ operation. This coupling of actions drives the competitive advantage of the region, and
various measures to strengthen inter-organizational cooperation in sectoral clusters were also included
in this paper. The author focuses on the example of the eastern part of the Czech–Polish border,
i.e., Euroregion Cieszyn Silesia, where a clear regional specialization in the field of culture and creative
industries is being established, and entities responsible for the regional policy of Poland and the Czech
Republic as well as for cross-border policy (i.a. TRITIA) are involved in integration policy. An example
would be, among others, interest in creating a cross-border cluster of culture and creative industries in
the Euroregion Cieszyn Silesia.
144
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
3. Clusters as an Advanced Form of Cross-Border Cooperation Development
The territorial and integrative context of cluster activity is an important prerequisite to
considering the possibility of cross-border cluster development in borderlands. Low levels of
socio-economic development of border areas indicate the need for greater emphasis on the economic
aspects of integration and cooperation, which so far have definitely been outweighed by the social
aspects. Not only in borderland regions, an important feature of innovative and competitive
organizations is their propensity for cooperation, including the development of various types of
network relationships [23–25].
These are structures in which individuals and groups, acting independently, collaborate towards
achieving a common goal [26]. This cooperation may take the form of various types of territorial
partnerships, single and multi-sector, as well as networks and clusters [27,28]. The degree of
institutionalization of clusters is varied [29]. They involve mainly businesses, but also institutions
of operating in varied business environments, local governments at various levels, NGOs, local
development agencies, schools, banking institutions and the R&D sector, including scientific bodies.
A cluster is a geographic concentration of interconnected enterprises, specialized suppliers,
service providers, businesses operating in related sectors and associated institutions in particular fields,
competing with each other but also cooperating [30]. The cluster can also be defined as geographically
limited agglomerations of enterprises [31], together generating synergistic effects. There are many
other similar definitions [32,33]
A cluster is defined by the following key elements: the cluster members and the relationships
between them, generated knowledge and innovation, and the economic impact (economic effect) of
cluster activities.
The process of cluster development in a border area can be considered as one of the new challenges
of cross-border cooperation, which is currently evolving from consisting of bilateral partnerships
towards a networking model. Clusters serve in the cooperation of entities within a certain geographical
area, which provides the ability to initiate and develop direct contact between the participants in the
network. Another premise is the possibility of achieving synergy through joint action for the benefit of
the given community and territory. Clusters as a form of networks are often characterized by loose and
voluntary relationships, involving the transfer of resources between individuals, including the transfer
of information and knowledge [34]. Clusters are also characterized by specialization in a particular
sector or industry, affinity of the technologies and skills used, consistency between objectives and
products or services offered on the market [35].
In the long term, the success of the cluster is determined by the quality of internal collaboration
and having common objectives among its participants. It is also important to appoint a leader who is
able to animate and develop cooperative relationships within a cluster, despite many obstacles and
restraints that constrain this process.
Natural tendencies for integration, the popularity of inter-organizational cooperation, as well as
the availability of mechanisms supporting this cooperation (including structural funds) are certainly
important factors conducive to the development of cluster structures in border regions, which concern
external entities interested in the development of clusters and networks. The European Commission
indicates that the regions which combine risk capital, competence and high quality research on a
broad portfolio of clusters have a chance to become nodes of innovation [36]. Such development
impulses are important in border regions, often peripheral and marginalized, mostly characterized
by lower indicators of economic and social development, also with weaker potential than preferably
located areas. For these regions, especially important is access to valuable knowledge and the ability to
overcome various types of barriers to development, including barriers in cross-border relations, thanks
to which economic and social cohesion of borderland is fostered. In the process of “learning” in border
regions and developing cross-border cooperation, an important role might be served by clusters.
The location of the cluster in cross-border environments where various forms of cooperation are
very popular, including cross-sector partnerships involving entities from neighbouring countries, could
145
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
become a catalyst for closer relations between cluster members. In general, the scope and objectives
of cooperation in the cluster are defined by partners themselves (entrepreneurs, local governments,
NGOs, etc.), but in the border region the broader context of cluster activity should be taken into
account—the desired and expected development of cross-border cooperation. Clusters have the chance
to become effective, future-oriented forms of cross-border cooperation which will contribute to a better
use of the diverse potential of the entire border, effectively overcoming barriers in building mutual
relations between neighbouring communities, as well as achieving more dynamic development of the
whole cross-border region. The development of cluster structures in the borderland contributes to
overcoming the negative aspects of the peripheral location of border areas, the use of the development
opportunities arising from the proximity of the neighbouring country, promoting the idea of European
unity and international cooperation, the spreading of the socio-cultural influences and innovations,
among other benefits
4. Cross-Border Entrepreneurship and Cross-Border Cooperation
Entrepreneurship is a result of the development of social relations. Entrepreneurs strive to create
value [37] and to improve their own personal well-being, but also that of society [38,39], which is
reflected in the wide economic development of the area in which they operate. The development of
entrepreneurship can be one of the indications of cross-border cooperation, leading to the improvement
of the socio-economic situation of marginalized areas. Social activities have an important role to
play here as well (e.g., joint planning at a cross-border level, events, cultural activities, education,
investment in infrastructure on both sides of the border, etc.), which makes the integration process
more natural and versatile [40]. According to P. Drucker, entrepreneurship as a mode of behaviour, can
be attributed to individuals, a team or institution [41]. Thus, in the regional system, the development
of entrepreneurship is the resultant behaviour of many entities with different business objectives.
In this sense, entrepreneurship refers not only to the business itself, but also to local governments,
non-governmental organizations or other entities in the business environment [42]. Of great importance
in the process of enterprise development are such factors as education and quality of intellectual capital,
intensity and diversity of support for growing businesses, the activity of local and regional authorities
in creating conditions conducive to economic revival, the social attitude of residents and the tradition
of entrepreneurship in the given area.
Cross-border entrepreneurship concerns many indications of economic activity beyond borders,
which usually include various forms of partnerships [43]. The cross-border location of economic
entities means that it is often not necessary to register a business activity on the other side of the border,
or else business activity is carried out there through another entity in the neighbouring border region.
The conceptual importance of cross-border entrepreneurship is thus determined by: the term
cross-border, which means exceeding national borders; and its transboundary nature, which entails
regular and continuous contact beyond national borders, with daily (institutionalized or not)
cooperation in the areas on both sides of the border [44].
Cross-border entrepreneurship represents an opportunity both for the development of the regions
as well as individual enterprises. The relationship between cross-border entrepreneurship and
cross-border cooperation is interdependent. On the one hand, cross-border cooperation stimulates
the development of entrepreneurship in marginalized regions, but at the same time, entrepreneurship
expanding across national borders is also an impetus for closer cross-border cooperation.
Cross-border entrepreneurship has an influence on capital, supply and sales markets, the search
for business partners, transfer of knowledge and know-how, acquiring staff and other resources of
interest to the partners on both sides of the border [45]. Cross-border entrepreneurship can also include
cross-border clusters and cooperation networks.
146
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
5. Conditions for the Development of Cross-Border Entrepreneurship in the Silesian Voivodeship
and the Moravian-Silesian Region
The Silesian Voivodeship and the Moravian-Silesian Region are twin areas located on the
Czech–Polish border, which for many years have been brought together through close cross-border
cooperation. According to the data as of 31 December 2013, Silesian Voivodeship had a population
of approximately 4.6 million and occupied an area of 12.333 km2, while GDP per capita at current
prices amounted to 44.960 PLN (approx. 11 thousand Euro). On the other hand, the Moravian-Silesian
Region was inhabited by approx. 1.2 million people and occupied an area of 5427 km2 and GDP per
capita at current prices amounted to 325.963 CZK (12 thousand Euro) [46]. Despite the differences
in the level of population and surface area, the economic potential of both regions is similar. In the
report “Doing Business 2015”, in terms of the conditions for conducting business, Poland was ranked
32nd place, while the Czech Republic 44th place for 189 countries assessed, while in terms of barriers
in starting up a business, Poland was classified 85th, while the Czech Republic was ranked at 110th
place [47].
In both countries, there exist similar business solutions. A comparative analysis shows that both in
the Silesian Voivodeship, as well as in the Moravian-Silesian Region, a number of institutions operate
which support developing companies. These are mainly technology parks and entrepreneurship
incubators, as well as loan and delivery funds. In both regions, there are also grants from structural
funds available, and additionally in these areas, there is the possibility of tapping into EU funds
intended specifically for the development of borderlands which come from the Operational Programme
of Cross-Border Cooperation Czech Republic—Republic of Poland 2007–2013 and the Operational
Programme INTERREG VA Czech Republic-Poland 2014–2020. There are also funds available that are
intended for other entities, e.g., local governments, NGOs, labour market institutions, etc. which are
aimed at the development of cross-border entrepreneurship, among other goals.
Both regions (together with Opole Voivodeship—Poland and the Local Government Žilina
Region—Slovakia) are members of the European Grouping of Territorial Cooperation TRITIA (TRITIA),
which was established in 2013. In 2013, the implementation of the strategy for the system cooperation
of the regions forming the European Grouping of Territorial Cooperation TRITIA was conducted,
in which economic goals and the main tasks for achieving cross-border cooperation in the field of
entrepreneurship were established [48].
The objectives and activities that foster the development of cross-border entrepreneurship are
included in Table 1.
Table 1. Objectives and actions supporting the development of cross-border entrepreneurship initiated
by European grouping of territorial cooperation TRITIA, Ltd. TRITIA.
Kind of Objectives/Support Discription of Activities
Overall objective
Creating an environment for employment growth and the
development of cross-border economic space based on
entrepreneurship, geographic location, local human resources,
common history and the complementary strengths of all the regions
Specific objectives
1. Establishing conditions for the development and
institutionalization of the different elements of cooperation
leading to the establishment of cross-border economic space
2. Supporting the development of human resources and
administrative/institutional potential of the
cross-border region
3. Supporting cross-border initiatives in research, development
and innovation.
147
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
Table 1. Cont.
Kind of Objectives/Support Discription of Activities
Selected forms of support
1. Pooling and cooperation of cross-border clusters
2. Cooperation of universities
3. Meetings institutionalisation of entrepreneurs from the
participating regions—brokerage event
4. The creation of cross-border economic forum
TRITIA—supporting the development of the business
community on the border
5. Promoting financial tools to support the SMEs sector and
institutions supporting entrepreneurship, enhancing the
attractiveness of the business environment and a culture of
innovation, together with raising the quality of public services
addressed to entrepreneurs
6. Cross-border development of the labour market
7. Coordination of cooperation of entities supporting
entrepreneurship, e.g., regional development agencies,
chambers of commerce, etc.
8. Activities undertaken within cross-border cooperation of
entities involved in R & D and the entrepreneurs sector, aimed
at developing an innovative environment
9. Cooperation in the creation of cross-border products
supporting a culture of innovation (e.g., education activities,
academic entrepreneurship, cross-border innovation portals,
joint actions aimed at implementing innovation strategies, etc.).
10. Investment in public infrastructure necessary to ensure the
development of entrepreneurship and innovation (science and
technology parks, entrepreneurship incubators, industrial
parks, innovation centres, etc.).
11. Cooperation in other areas of R & D (research and
development), including fostering the integration of academic
and commercial spheres.
Source: own elaboration based on information about the project.
In 2014, TRITIA and the Regional Development Agency from Ostrava conducted a qualitative
study of 30 young companies (15 Czech and 15 Polish companies, each of which have been in
operation on the market for less than three years) among small and medium-sized enterprises in
the Silesia Voivodeship and Moravian-Silesian Region. The study was conducted as part of the
project "Sustainable economic activity", co-financed by the Operational Programme of Cross-Border
Cooperation Czech Republic–Republic of Poland 2007–2013. Respondents for the study were recruited
from among the companies leading innovation-oriented development activities and interested in
developing cross-border business, benefiting from the support of entrepreneurship incubators,
technology parks and other business institutions on the border. The research involved the development
of case studies examining the company’s development path with reference to cross-border interest in
entrepreneurship and integration with other companies operating on the border. In-depth personal
interviews (IDI) were also conducted as part of the study, and the respondents were asked, among
others, questions regarding the following issues:
- the process of creating companies and business conditions in the market,
- the scope of the offer and its development,
- the main market, including the market focused on cross-border cooperation,
- interest in the development of intellectual capital in their companies,
- cooperation with universities,
- interest in the sectoral integration and cross-border cooperation,
- recommendations on the stabilization of the company on a cross-border market.
The results of this study are shown in Tables 2–6.
148
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
Table 2. Structure of cooperation.
Structure of Cooperation
Silesian Voivodeship (PL) Moravian-Silesian Region (CZ)
2/3 of the surveyed companies were established
using a grant enabling unemployed people to start a
company. This implies the need to respect business
plans and running business activities mainly as a
self-employed person or hiring a few persons. Thus
the development of cooperation with other entities is
progressing rather slowly, as companies try to act
based on their own resources. The use of domestic
subsidies often restricts development cooperation.
Most companies have not given priority to acquiring
enterprises for cooperation purposes from
cross-border market so far.
For small businesses the biggest expense are wages,
and therefore they restrict employment to a
minimum, while they still prefer close relationships
with regular suppliers and close associates. In this
way permanent cooperative groups of enterprises are
formed whose business activity is a part of a common
product or service. Until present, this cooperation has
been focused on the regional market, companies are
not looking for business partners on cross-border
market, but some companies are already present in
this market as producers.
Source: own elaboration based on data from the project.
Table 3. The scale of business activity.
The Scale of Business Activity
Silesian Voivodeship (PL) Moravian-Silesian Region (CZ)
In foreign markets, 6 companies operate (more than
1/3 of respondents), and for one of them exports
account for 90% of revenue. Three companies operate
on a cross-border market, the remaining three are
suppliers for Czech companies. In the vast majority,
however, the domestic market is their dominant
market, although all Polish respondents are
interested in the Czech market. Most companies
declare that they are too weak to compete in the
cross-border market.
In the foreign markets, 7 companies operate, 1
company already operates on a cross-border market,
others are investigating this market. The companies
claim that at the first stage of development they want
to focus on the domestic market since they do not feel
strong enough to enter foreign markets, including the
cross-border market.
Source: own elaboration based on data from the project.
Table 4. Development of human resources.
Development of Human Resources
Silesian Voivodeship Moravian-Silesian Region
Most respondents have used specialist training in
their field and entrepreneurship before starting their
business. These people have gained expertise before
they established the company. More than 1/3 of
companies intend to continue specialist trainings also
in the scope of business activity.
Undertaking business activity was mainly driven by
the competence of the respondents and not different
types of incentives to establish a business. Despite the
wide range of courses, trainings, etc. self-education is
the dominant mode, as well as investing in language
learning. Companies are also willing to benefit from
the offer of free consultations, conferences and
meetings funded by, among others,
cross-border funds.
Source: own elaboration based on data from the project.
149
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
Table 5. Collaboration with universities.
Cooperation with Universities
Silesian Voivodeship Moravian-Silesian Region
1/5 of respondents cooperate with universities in
projects, R&D services, and vocational education of
students. Much more popular is the cooperation with
NGOs offering companies specific advisory support
regarding business development, consulting and
training. Universities lack such an offer. Through
these forms of cooperation, respondents have contact
with cross-border partners, since universities and
non-governmental organizations often rely on
cross-border funds.
Nearly 2/3 of respondents cooperate with
universities with regard to research or educational
activities, e.g., organization of apprenticeships and
traineeships. No concrete results of this collaboration
have been indicated. Cooperation with universities,
which are beneficiaries of cross-border projects gives
businesses access to partners from the border area.
Source: own elaboration based on data from the project.
Table 6. Willingness to integrate.
Willingness to Integrate
Silesian Voivodeship Moravian-Silesian Region
The vast majority of respondents declare membership
or cooperation with trade or business associations, or
even clusters (1 company).
Only one company is a member of a trade association,
and the others did not have such a need or did not
realize there was such a possibility.
Source: own elaboration based on data from the project.
The selected research findings presented above, because of the sampling mode (non-random),
reflect only indicative trends in the development of young companies operating in the Silesian
Voivodeship and Moravian-Silesian Region. The results indicate that the presence of the enterprise in
the border area market does not mean that it automatically treats the neighbouring market as a natural
expansion area. Awareness of the border is very strong among novice entrepreneurs. As companies
are focused on overcoming the initial challenges in starting up their business and gaining the nearest
market (mostly local), the prospect of cross-border market is quite remote for them. However, the
tendency to cooperate with universities and the development of human resources, which contributes
to improving the quality of human capital in the region, should be assessed positively [49].
In these studies, the author took personal part, since her Polish consulting company develops
cross-border entrepreneurship in three aspects: by serving Czech customers, through the procurement
of the suppliers from the Czech market and through the Polish–Czech consortium in which large
orders are provided. In addition to the cited studies, in 2015, the author conducted her own qualitative
research based on interviews with 14 companies (seven Polish and seven Czech companies) from the
provinces of Silesia and Moravia that maintain business relationships across the border. The conclusions
from the study are as follows:
- companies are interested primarily in acquiring specific cooperation partners (suppliers,
customers) in the area of industry in which they specialize, they attach less importance
to networking;
- companies expect cross-organizational cooperation, which will allow them to find market niches
and will quickly manifest in their revenues and profits, and they are less interested in the exchange
of knowledge, information, joint promotion, etc.;
- companies expect governments, scientific institutions and other business entities to take a
partnership approach in the development of cross-border entrepreneurship, but in this field, the
integration is still too weak and is characterized by differing interests;
150
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
- companies indicate that the purchasing power of borderland residents is weak and competition
in the market large, and therefore entering the same sector on the other side of the border can be
afforded by only the most competitive enterprises,
- as a great aid in the development of cross-border entrepreneurship, companies point to direct
contacts on the other side of the border, e.g., Polish–Czech staff, participation in the Polish–Czech
Chamber of Commerce, participation in trade missions, participation in EU projects etc.
- as the key barriers to the development of cross-border entrepreneurship, companies point to: the
lack of an effective system of support for such operations on the border, the lack of sufficient
knowledge about the partner’s market, currency risk, a similar structure of demand on both sides
of the border and difficulties in producing a unique product, the bureaucracy, and the divergence
in regulations.
The above-described attitude of the surveyed companies represents a big contrast to the
above-mentioned actions supporting cross-border entrepreneurship which have been declared by
TRITIA and Regional Development Agency of Ostrava. Similar projects supporting the development
of Polish–Czech business have been undertaken by Czech-Polish Chamber of Commerce in Ostrava,
Regional Development Agency in Ostrava, Innovation Support Centre VSB of Technical University in
Ostrava, Entrepreneurs Club in the Castle of Cieszyn, Regional Chamber of Commerce and Industry
in Bielsko-Biala and many other public and social entities, as well as local governments and their
associations. Analysis of the initiatives undertaken by these entities indicates that many companies
are monitoring the cross-border market, but do not have the courage to enter it. A meeting of Czech
and Polish entrepreneurs, sponsored by the Czech-Polish Chamber of Commerce in Ostrava, is held
annually in Ostrava and involves at least 150–200 companies from both countries, but it has not
focused on the development of specific business investments. Similar opinions can be found among
users of the Polish-Czech portal [50] which is a services platform in the field of cross-border economic
cooperation for small and medium-sized enterprises. Another portal [51] dedicated for the inhabitants
of the Polish–Czech border has a similar function. The development of cross-border business might
be perceived by businessmen as an innovation in approaching the market, for which they are not
yet ready. For many companies, innovative business solutions and the accompanying changes bring
uncertainty which is difficult to deal with [52].
While cross-border cooperation is for many local governments and other organizations on both
sides of the border a statutory requirement and a natural course of action, for other entrepreneurs
it is meaningful only when real profits can be generated. In contrast to public or social bodies,
entrepreneurs focus their activities primarily on the profit maximization of their own company, and
only later on the interests of entities in their surroundings.
It should be noted, however, that despite general declarations about the need to support
cross-border business, local governments do not see economic issues as a key area of cross-border
cooperation. In 2015, the author conducted on the Czech–Polish border a comprehensive study
assessing cross-border cooperation among a group of 466 Polish local government units and 199 Czech
local government units (differences in the number of respondents are due to the size of the areas
studied). The study was carried out by means of CATI, CAWI and CASI interviews. The elected results
of this study are presented in Table 7.
151
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
Table 7. Evaluation of Polish–Czech border cooperation by local authorities in the border area.
Respondents form the Polish Part of Border Area (PL) Respondents from the Czech Part of Border Area (SK)
Assessment of cross-border cooperation in selected areas
- culture 76.37% of positive answers
- sport, recreation, tourism 76.64% of
positive answers
- town-twinning 64.92% of positive answers
- safety 54.38% of positive answers
- environmental protection 50.76% of
positive answers
- economic cooperation 38.55% of positive answers
- culture 53.36% of positive answers
- sport, recreation, tourism 49.03% of
positive answers
- town-twinning 44.34% of positive answers
- security 35.89% of positive answers
- environmental protection 30.13% of
positive answers
- economic cooperation 22.92% of positive answers
Selected factors shaping the development of cross-border cooperation
- the quality of interpersonal relations 77.02% of
positive answers
- joint acquisition of EU funds 80.92% of
positive answers
- historical affinity and geographical proximity
47.04% of positive answers
- the economic interests 24.30% of
positive answers
- the quality of interpersonal relations 65.97% of
positive answers
- joint acquisition of EU funds 50.53% of
positive answers
- historical affinity and geographical proximity
59.76% of positive answers
- the economic interests 22.85% of
positive answers
The projected growth rate of the Polish–Czech border cooperation in the next 10 years
- cooperation will continue to develop—53.33% of
positive answers
- cooperation will remain at a similar level—39.36%
of positive answers
- cooperation will disappear—4.37% of
positive answers
- there will be no cooperation—2.94% of
positive answers
- cooperation will continue to develop—49.95% of
positive answers
- cooperation will remain at a similar level—38.80%
of positive answers
- cooperation will disappear—7.90% of
positive answers
- there will be no cooperation—3.36% of
positive answers
Projected development directions of Polish–Czech border cooperation in the next 10 years
- sports, recreation and tourism 21.48% of
positive answers
- culture 16.48% of positive answers
- education and higher education 5.19% of
positive answers
- economic cooperation 5.81% of positive answers
- sports, recreation and tourism 15.89% of
positive answers
- culture 18.05% of positive answers
- education and higher education 10.47% of
positive answers
- economic cooperation 3.47% of positive answers
The dominant partners in the cross-border cooperation for local governments
- local governments 45.79% of positive answers
- NGOs 18.17% of positive answers
- enterprises 4.83% of positive answers
- Local governments 62.99% of positive answers
- NGOs 10.50% of positive answers
- enterprises 2.96% of positive answers
Source: own elaboration based on data from the project.
The above data indicates that economic relations occupy a marginal position in cross-border
relations as developed by the Polish and Czech local governments. Similar results were obtained for
the Polish-Belarusian-Ukrainian border area [53]. This is in contrast to the main assumptions of this
paper concerning the development of border areas. Sustainable development of the border should
take into account both social and economic aspects; meanwhile, currently cross-border cooperation
focuses primarily on social issues. This is evident both in terms of the leading areas of cooperation
(culture definitely outweighs the economy), as well as in the factors which are indicated as determinants
of development of cooperation. In this case, the historical relationship or the quality of human
relationships play much greater roles than common economic interests. The economy was also not
listed among the most frequently indicated directions of development of cross-border cooperation in
the next 10 years. It was outrun by sport, culture, tourism, etc. The study findings indicate that nearly
half of the surveyed local authorities stated that cooperation would continue to develop. The dominant
152
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
model of cross-border cooperation for the coming years will be primarily based on public partnerships
and public–social partnerships, based on local governments and non-governmental organizations,
whereas cooperation with enterprises attracts relatively little interest.
The results presented above indicate that young companies located on the Czech–Polish border are
not sufficiently mobilized in the integration and development of cross-border entrepreneurship. At the
same time, it is clear that in certain areas that cross-border cooperation is developing very dynamically
(e.g., culture, recreation, tourism), which also points to the economic potential of these industries.
In 2014, the author conducted research on the possibility of establishing in Polish-Czech Euroregion
Cieszyn Silesia a cross-border cluster of culture, which would have a sectoral nature [54,55]. In this
cluster, the participation of governments, NGOs, scientific institutions and companies operating in the
broadly defined field of culture, including creative industries (enterprises were the least represented in
this group). Qualitative research (CAWI interviews) consisted of 20 entities from Poland and the Czech
Republic, which fulfilled the requirements of participation in the potential cluster and declared their
willingness to strengthen cross-border cooperation in the field of culture. Studies have shown that a
key prerequisite for integration measures are the benefits which the respondent can derive from this
cooperation. Nearly 68% of respondents said they are interested in cooperation in the field of culture
and creative industries within the transboundary cluster, about 7% were not interested and 25% had
no opinion on this subject. According to the study, despite the fact that in this area creative industries
are developing rapidly, cultural cooperation associated more with the social rather than the economic
sphere might become a platform for the further development of clusters. The establishment of such
clusters is dependent of the potential cluster participants finding some distinct advantages in this form
of integration.
This is confirmed by the opinions of the companies, extracted from the above studies by the author,
in the sector of culture and creative industries (18 entities, including cinemas, theatres and cabarets,
studios of design arts, museums and regional chambers, design studios, graphic and advertising
studios, computer game developers, craftsmen, folk artists, media). These entities were asked about
the following issues:
- the nature and extent of cooperation with entities of the neighbouring country,
- key benefits of cluster cooperation in the field of culture and creative industries as well as barriers
to this process.
According to those narrowly focused studies, potential participants in the cluster of culture and
creative industries work mainly with local governments and public cultural entities, which are often
the recipients of their offerings. This explains the important role of local governments and cultural
bodies in the potential development of a cluster for culture and creative industries. Some of these
entities also cooperate with NGOs working in related industries, as well as with the media (these
tendencies are stronger on the Polish side than on the Czech side). This fact also bodes well in terms of
other potential clusters.
Greater interest in entering into clusters exists on the Polish side, where this form of cooperation
is more popular, and also more companies declare interest in the Czech market and its customers.
Therefore, efforts to strengthen cross-border cooperation in the form of a cluster would require more
support from the Czech side for the very idea of further integration, and perhaps a better understanding
of the meaning and purpose of such measures. A prerequisite for mobilizing cluster cooperation
should be a better understanding of its benefits for each party.
The studied entities were asked questions about the evaluation of the benefits which can be
accrued from closer cooperation in the sector of culture and creative industries within the cluster.
The respondents answered that these might include the following benefits:
- better joint promotion of the offer among customers around the border and reaching new groups
of recipients,
- the possibility of joint acquisition of EU funds for cross-border projects,
153
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
- mutual compensation of resources and other forms of mutual assistance within the framework of
ongoing business operations,
- joint training of staff and improving of standards of operation and exchange of know-how in the
cultural and creative industries,
- optimization of the costs of economic activity.
The key barriers to cluster cooperation included:
- lack of funds for projects in the cluster,
- differences in the goals of individual parties' activities,
- low level of knowledge of potential partners and lack of confidence in them,
- the lack of real involvement of partners in the activities of the cluster.
6. Prospects for the Development of Cross-Border Entrepreneurship in the Cluster Model
As indicated by the above-described study, cross-border entrepreneurship is developing much
more slowly than cross-border cooperation in social areas such as culture, sports, tourism or education.
Efforts to expand the transboundary market are much weaker among companies, and the trend
for integration of border communities at various levels is only indirectly related to the economy.
It seems, however, that economic issues which are seemingly distant from social issues in practice
are interconnected, as can be demonstrated, among other factors, by the cross-border cultural cluster
mentioned above, also encouraging cooperation between entrepreneurs from the creative industries.
Assuming that a cross-border cluster should be cross-sectoral and, therefore, should integrate
both businesses as well as local governments, non-governmental organizations and scientific bodies,
a thesis can be put forward that the areas in which cross-border entrepreneurship may develop in a
cluster model are those forms of cross-border cooperation that are developing most dynamically at
present on the border. Cross-border cooperation in the form of various types of partnerships could
therefore be the basis for further integration within the cluster model. Owing to extended cross-border
cooperation, entities operating on the border understand the importance and benefits of integration
activities. They can use this mechanism to achieve their own benefits, and thus for meeting the
development needs of the whole border area. It can therefore be concluded that cluster initiatives on
the Czech–Polish border, which immediately precede the formation of a cross-border cluster, should
have their origin in cooperation of a social nature (e.g., in the fields of culture, sports, tourism, etc.).
This is due to the fact that, in this area, the strongest integration processes take place, which can
become a catalyst for the future development of the cluster. For the currently dominant, solid bilateral
partnerships, cooperation development will be represent much added-value, mobilizing efforts to
establish a cluster.
While companies do not feel strong enough to independently develop cross-border
entrepreneurship, in these areas where the activities of companies on the border are connected with
cross-border cooperation of a social nature, further integration is possible.
The economic development of the border region should be attended to by all the key stakeholders
of the two neighbouring countries. The creation of a cross-border cluster should involve primarily
entities conducting business activities (including companies, social organizations, public and
government institutions providing some paid services and some schools and the media); there is
also a place for institutions and non-profit organizations and the broad business- and social-related
environment. Without a doubt, the formation of the cluster should be based on the specializations
relevant to the border region, because in this way the economic interests of its constituent bodies
go hand in hand with the interests of the region. Such a cluster can seek support in the regional
environment and can draw on various types of support mechanisms of a systemic or individual
nature [56]. Currently, by the example of the Czech–Polish border, and especially the voivodeship of
Silesia and the Moravian-Silesian country, culture and creative industries can be pointed to as two key
areas of integration. As mentioned above, the tendency for cluster cooperation on the Czech–Polish
154
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
border is mainly centred on the Polish side, but more and more also Czech entrepreneurs are gaining
interest. Two cluster initiatives are already in place, the so-called Silesian Cluster of the Design in
Cieszyn and the Locomotive of Culture in Bielsko-Biala [57] which intend to open up cross-border
cooperation. An exemplary model of cluster cooperation in the sector of culture and creative industries
is shown in Table 8. In Table 9 we can find recommended market segmentation and description of the
role of participants in the cross-border cluster of culture and creative industries.
Table 8. Proposed areas of cross-border cooperation and cross-border entrepreneurship possible for
the development of a cluster in the cultural sector.
Cultural Cluster
Public Sector NGO Sector Scientific Sector Commercial Sector
Local governments,
community centres,
theatres, museums,
libraries, cinemas, art
schools, points of
cultural information and
virtual platforms of
cultural information etc.
NGOs operating in the
sphere of culture, e.g.,
music and dance groups,
associations cultivating
folklore and folk culture,
associations of amateur
artists etc.
Research units conducting
research and training in the
fine arts, humanities and
social sciences
The media, commercial
cultural institutions,
companies from the creative
industries sector, event
companies, artistic
management companies etc.
Source: own elaboration based on data from the project.
Table 9. Recommended market segmentation and the role of participants in the cross-border cluster of
culture and creative industries.
Group Description of the Group
Freelancers
Independent developers, not employed on a full-time basis
in culture or in the creative industries, e.g., actors, dancers,
musicians, sculptors, painters and writers. This group
plays an important role in the cluster, since it creates a
crude substance (e.g., manuscript), which may
subsequently be processed (e.g., in the form of a book).
Cooperation within the cluster can help them in the
dissemination of work to a wider audience.
Micro Businessmen and Industry giants
In the sector of culture and creative industries, there are
many small and large companies, few middle-size ones.
This is due to the specificity of the industry. Small
companies usually invest in niches, while the largest
companies operate in sectors oriented on typically
commercial activities, e.g., music, publishing, television or
IT and often create powerful multi-sectoral, international
conglomerates. Cooperation in the cluster can help smaller
entities to compete with the “industry giants”. The key is
to engage in joint activities with appropriate partners,
having complementary competencies and resources.
Centres of creative education
Centres shaping the knowledge and competencies of
creative people, educating personnel for companies (from
the creative sectors, and not only), creators and performers
of culture as well as teaching staff, who communicate their
knowledge and skills to the next generation. An important
role is played here by academic centres educating
professional artists and different kinds of entities operating
to stimulate the creativity of society (e.g., courses in design,
sewing, etc.).
155
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
Table 9. Cont.
Group Description of the Group
Public cultural institutions
Museums, cultural centers, libraries, theaters, cinemas,
concert halls, galleries and historic buildings, conducting a
whole spectrum of socio-cultural activities, providing
visitors a variety of cultural forms of entertainment (e.g.,
the performances, festivals, music concerts), acquiring
knowledge and new skills (e.g., craft workshops, drawing),
as well as developing their creative expression. Their offer
attracts residents, domestic and foreign tourists, as well as
artists looking for possibilities of establishing contacts with
other artists or just inspiration for the development of their
own work.
Gatekeepers
Persons or entities that determine which products is
launched on the market, e.g., art gallery manager, chief
editor of the publishing house, the artistic director of the
theatre, etc.
Creative hidden people
Talented people, who use their talent to work for entities
outside the creative industries. They occupy positions in
the project departments (designers, architects), marketing
(copywriters, graphic designers), IT (IT specialists), as well
as in other spheres, where their creative abilities are used.
Non-governmental organizations
(NGOs)
Organizations of authors, but also those who want to work
to strengthen these sectors in the region. These
organizations are often involved in the development of
socio-cultural heritage of the given region, including
support of cooperation and integration in the environment
of creators, promoting the work of young talents,
supporting public participation in culture and its activity
with respect to fostering national heritage, promotion of
cultural heritage of a region in the country and abroad.
Public authorities
Public authorities can initiate and support the
development of creative industries in the region in many
different ways, both directly (e.g., through financing or
co-financing of business, science and culture-related
activities) as well as indirectly, reinforcing the environment
in which these entities operate.
Source: own elaboration [57].
Cooperation of organizations, commercial entities and institutions within the cluster of culture
and creative industries fits perfectly with the determinants of cross-border cooperation as well as
cross-border entrepreneurship. In terms of cross-border cluster operation, one can talk about further
integration within a specific industry, sector e.g., culture, as well as the creation of mechanisms to
encourage improvement of competitiveness and development of entities operating within a cluster.
So far, there are not many examples of networking available. This may be due to many reasons: too
strong an impact of barriers hindering this type of cooperation in the border area, and insufficient
awareness of the benefits, advantages and conditions of networking cooperation.
Although the issue of partnership and sustainable cooperation is not an unfamiliar subject to
any of the entities operating on the border (e.g., due to the large number of cross-border projects in
different areas), among the companies there is a lack of spontaneous tendency to develop cross-border
entrepreneurship. While the majority of surveyed companies declare that they are interested in such
cooperation, they do not take any actions towards its effective establishment. It is a large dissonance
compared to the intensive cross-border cooperation occurring in the social sphere in terms of culture.
As the author recommends, it is therefore possible to draw on the good cooperation that exists between
156
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
local governments in order to intensify economic relations. Such opportunities have emerged on the
basis of previous studies on the establishment of transboundary cultural clusters. Research cited in
this study confirms the important role local governments and the non-governmental sector has in the
cross border development entrepreneurship of which can be transferred to enterprises. Extremely
important is the education of potential participants of networks and clusters in terms of the specifics of
this form of cooperation.
7. Conclusions
Cross-border entrepreneurship is an important aspect in the development of cross-border
cooperation, which should contribute to ensuring there are equal development opportunities in
peripheral areas at risk of marginalization. It is favoured by both natural integration trends in the
border regions as well as the high availability of EU funds from the INTERREG program for the
development of cross-border cooperation. In the studied area of the Czech–Polish border, effects
of cross-border cooperation are clearly visible in the social sphere, primarily in the fields of culture,
education, sports and tourism, administration, etc. However, this cooperation has developed to a much
lesser extent in the economic sphere. For most companies operating in border regions, the markets of
neighbouring countries are treated equally to other, much more distant foreign markets. It is difficult
to identify clear trends for economic cooperation here.
The results of research and several years of involvement by the author in cross-border
entrepreneurship, from a scientific and practical point of view, show that the development of
cross-border cooperation—supported by local authorities—is limited to bilateral contact and projects.
It is difficult to indicate a direction that allows for further strengthening of cooperation in the economic
field, although further cluster cooperation seems a natural path.
Despite a series of actions aimed at systematic promotion of economic cooperation on the
borderline, it is difficult to identify a significant number of such examples in Silesia Voivodeship
and the Moravian-Silesian Region. This is in contrast to the strategy of cross-border cooperation for
the border area, which has been implemented since 2013. In this document, economic cooperation is
of key importance. Another real problem of cross-border cooperation is the stability of partnerships
and lack of tendency to transform bilateral cooperation into networking cooperation. This means
that cooperation between the same partners strengthens, but it does not expand to other entities.
In these circumstances, cluster cooperation can be a model especially worth promoting among all
entities interested in border development, among local governments as well as non-governmental
organizations and entrepreneurs.
Although sustainable development of the border should be based on both social and economic
processes, the sphere of entrepreneurship is now clearly ignored. It can be seen i.a. in the results
of research carried out among local governments. They do not appreciate the economic aspects of
cross-border cooperation, and the most promising directions of further integration are considered to be
culture, education, tourism, etc. These sectors, however, also have certain economic potential, which
means that there are opportunities for the involvement of entrepreneurs in cross-border cooperation in
these areas.
The study results confirmed that between the Polish and Czech companies operating in the border
area, there are differences in developmental processes, approaches to businesses, types of offerings,
etc. This is not conducive to the natural processes of integration. It can therefore not be said that the
chances of economic integration in each of the branches are identical.
In trying to solve the research problem relating to the possible development of cross-border
entrepreneurship on the Polish–Czech border, the author turned to the concept of cluster cooperation,
which has been more developed on the Polish side. Prospects for the development of clusters on the
Polish–Czech borderland have been linked with the sectors that are developing most quickly in this
area, i.e., the sector of culture and creative industries. As the second criterion, the author took into
account the involvement of partners from different sectors: administration and local government,
157
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
science and non-governmental organizations from both sides of the border. The studies conducted in
this field have shown that culture and creative industries is the sphere where the entities of the Polish
and Czech border areas see the greatest opportunities for further integration.
In the opinion of the author, the catalyst for cross-border entrepreneurship, at least in some sectors
(e.g., in the field of creative industries), may centre on the very sophisticated cross-border cooperation
at the public and social levels (i.e., the cooperation of local governments and non-governmental
organizations), in which enterprises operating on each side of the border can be engaged. It also gives
impetus to further expansion of this cooperation and transforming bilateral relationships to ones based
on networking and clustering. Such opportunities have already been verified by the author in previous
studies analysing the conditions conducive to the emergence of cross-border cultural clusters.
According to the author, in the study area, it is difficult to extract natural tendencies and the
desire of companies to develop cross-border entrepreneurship, but a factor that can boost economic
integration is rapidly developing cross-border cooperation in the social field, e.g., in culture [47,48]
etc. Although it is not a universal solution that can be applied to any industry, at least in sectors
distinguished by intense cross-border relations, including business entities in this cooperation can
bring measurable results, reflected also in the development of the border area. The condition for this
mechanism is the awareness of the benefits which both parties can gain from the development of
co-operation, also including entrepreneurs. Another important consideration affecting the efficiency
of cross-border cooperation that determines the participation of entrepreneurs is the creation of
mechanisms for its further development, including the gradual transformation of bilateral agreements
into networking and clustering cooperation.
In conclusion, as long as the sectors such as culture and creative industries (or other sectors in other
border regions) will be indicated directly or indirectly according to regional specializations, whose
development is supported by all stakeholders of cross-border cooperation (including i.a. governments,
research bodies, NGOs and entrepreneurs), then the cross-border cooperation can be transformed into
that of clusters. This cooperation has its origin in typically social activities (as mentioned above, EU
bilateral projects implemented mainly by local governments and non-governmental organizations),
but under favorable conditions, it can also extend to business activities that generate economic benefits
and contribute to the development of cross-border regions by strengthening regional specializations.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.
References
1. Bleeke, J.; Ernst, D. The way to win in cross-border alliances. Harvard Bus. Rev. 1991, 69, 127–135.
2. Program INTERREG VA Czech Republic-Poland 2014–2020. Available online: https://www.ewt.gov.pl/
media/5504/Program_INTERREG_V_A_Czechy_Polska.pdf (accessed on 15 November 2015).
3. The OECD Study on Local Partnerships, OECD, Paris 1990. Available online: http://www.oecd.org/
cfe/leed/theoecdstudyonlocalpartnerships.htm (accessed on 20 November 2015).
4. Ray, C. Neo-endogenous Rural Development in the EU. In Book Handbook of Rural Studies; Cloke, P.,
Marsden, T., Mooney, P., Eds.; Sage: London, UK, 2006; pp. 278–291.
5. Simard, J.F.; Chiasson, G. Introduction: Territorial Governance—A New Take on Development. Can. J.
Reg. Sci. 2008, 31, 471–485.
6. European Chapter of Border and Cross-Border Regions. Available online: http://www.aebr.eu/files/
publications/110915_Charta_EN_clean.pdf (accessed on 15 November 2015).
7. European Outline Convention on Transfrontier Co-operation between Territorial Communities or Authorities.
Available online: https://rm.coe.int/CoERMPublicCommonSearchServices/DisplayDCTMContent?
documentId=0900001680078b0c (accessed on 15 November 2015).
8. European Charter of Regional Self-Government. Available online: http://www.cvce.eu/en/obj/ draft_
european_charter_of_regional_self_government_5_june_1997-en-78ae4dcf-6346-4aa8-8474-7535e4091bf7.html
(accessed on 15 November 2015).
158
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
9. Perkowski, M. Współpraca transgraniczna. Available online: http://www.prawoipartnerstwo.pl/stara/
publikacje/Wspolpraca.pdf (accessed on 15 November 2015). (In Polish)
10. Rozporza˛dzenie Rady z 21 Czerwca 1999 r.; Wprowadzaja˛ce Ogólne Przepisy Dotycza˛ce Funduszy
Strukturalnych nr 1260/1999/WE. Available online: http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docoffic/
official/regulation/content/pl/02_pdf/00_1_sf_1_pl.pdf (accessed on 15 November 2015). (In Polish)
11. Geddes, M. Partnership Making Policy, Report: Enhancing the Capacity of Partnerships to Influence Policy; Available
online: http://www.oecd.org/cfe/leed/36279186.pdf (accessed on 15 November 2015).
12. Rozporza˛dzenie Rady z 11 lipca 2006 r. nr (WE) nr 1083/2006, Ustanawiaja˛ce Przepisy Ogólne Dotycza˛ce
Europejskiego Funduszu Rozwoju Regionalnego, Europejskiego Funduszu Społecznego Oraz Funduszu
Spójnos´ci i Uchylaja˛ce Rozporza˛dzenie (WE) nr 1260/1999. Available online: http://www.oecd.org/
cfe/leed/36279186.pdf (accessed on 16 November 2015). (In Polish)
13. Lepik, K. Euroregions as mechanisms for strengthening cross-border cooperation in the Baltic Sea region.
Trames 2009, 13, 265–284. [CrossRef]
14. Kramsch, O.; Hooper, B. Cross Border Governance in the European Union; Routledge: New York, NY, USA, 2004.
15. Perkmann, M. Policy Entrepreneurship and Multi-Level Governance. A Comparative Study of European
Cross-Border Regions. Environ. Plan. C Gov. Policy 2007, 25, 861–879. [CrossRef]
16. Harguindéguy, J.; Bray, Z. Does cross-border co-operation empower European regions? The case of
INTERREG III-A France-Spain. Environ. Plan. C Gov. Policy 2009, 27, 747–760. [CrossRef]
17. Kurowska-Pysz, J. Problem trwało´sci klastrów dofinansowanych ze ´srodków Unii Europejskiej w aspekcie
nowych uwarunkowan´ wdraz˙ ania projektów w latach 2014-2020. In Book Zarza˛dzanie i inz˙ynieria produkcji.
Wybrane zagadnienia; Kurowska-Pysz, J., Ed.; Wydawnictwo Naukowe Wyz˙ szej Szkoły Biznesu w Da˛browie
Górniczej: Da˛browa Górnicza, Poland, 2015. (In Polish)
18. Trott, P. Innovation Management and New Product Development; Pearson Education Ltd.: Edinburgh, UK, 2008.
19. Etzkowitz, H. The triple helix. In University-Industry-Government Innovation in Action; Routledge: London,
UK, 2009; pp. 15–22.
20. Carayannis, E.; Barth, T.; Campbell, D. The Quintuple Helix innovation model: Global warming as a
challenge and driver for innovation. J. Innov. Entrep. 2012. [CrossRef]
21. Olesin´ ski, Z. Zarza˛dzanie Relacjami Mie˛dzyorganizacyjnymi; Wydawnictwo CH Beck: Warszawa, Poland, 2010.
(In Polish)
22. Henning, M.; Moodysson, J.; Nilsson, M. Innovation and Regional Transformation. In From Clusters to New
Combinations; Region Skane: Malmö, Spain, 2010.
23. Lazerson, M.; Lorenzoni, G. The Firms that Feed Industrial Districts: A Return to the Italian Source.
Ind. Corp. Chang. 1999, 8, 235–265. [CrossRef]
24. Bathelt, H. Cluster Relations in the Media Industry: Exploring the “Distanced Neighbour” Paradox in
Leipzig. Reg. Stud. 2005, 39, 105–127. [CrossRef]
25. Sheppard, E. Positionality and globalization in economic geography. In The Changing Economic Geography of
Globalization: Reinventing Space; Giovanna, V., Ed.; Taylor & Francis: Oxfordshire, UK, 2005.
26. Lipnack, J.; Stamps, J. The age of network. In Organizing Principles for the 21st Century; Oliver Wight
Publication: Gloucester, UK, 1994.
27. Pachura, P. Analiza potencjału budowy efektywnych struktur transgranicznych sieci innowacyjnych na
przykładzie województwa s´la˛skiego oraz regionów Czech i Słowacji, Ministerstwo Rozwoju Regionalnego,
Cz˛estochowa 2009, 9. Available online: https://www.ewaluacja.gov.pl/Wyniki/Documents/2_059.pdf
(accessed on 30 November 2015). (In Polish).
28. Brito, C.; Correia, R. Regions as networks. Towards a conceptual framework of territorial dynamic,
Research Work in Progress. 2010, 357, pp. 20–23. Available online: http://www.fep.up.pt/investigacao/
workingpapers/10.01.18_wp357.pdf (accessed on 30 November 2015).
29. Fromhold-Eisebith, E.; Eisebith, G. How to institutionalize innovative clusters? Comparing explicit top-down
and implicit bottom-up approaches. Res. Policy 2005, 34, 1250–1268. [CrossRef]
30. Porter, M. The Cooperative Advantage of Nations; Harvard Business Review: New York, NY, USA, 1990;
Available online: http://dl1.cuni.cz/pluginfile.php/50387/mod_resource/content/0/Porter-competitiveadvantage.
pdf (accessed on 30 November 2015).
31. Rosenfeld, S.A. Community College/Cluster Connections: Specialization and Competitiveness in the United
States and Europe. Econ. Dev. Q. 2000, 14, 51–62. [CrossRef]
159
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
32. Almodovar, J.; Teixeira, A. Conceptualizing clusters through the lens of networks: A critical synthesis.
FEP Working Papers, 2009. Available online: http://www.fep.up.pt/investigacao/workingpapers/
09.07.15_wp328.pdf (accessed on 20 December 2015).
33. Maskell, P.; Kebir, L. What qualifies as a cluster theory? Available online: http://www3.druid.dk/
wp/20050009.pdf (accessed on 30 November 2015).
34. Lepik, K.L.; Krigul, M. Cross-border cooperation institution in building a knowledge cross-border region.
Probl. Perspect. Manag. 2009, 7, 33–45.
35. Rialland, A. Cluster Dynamics and Innovation; IGLO-MP2020Working Paper; Norwegian University of Science
and Technology: Trondheim, Norway, 2009.
36. Ketels, C.; Lindqvist, G.; Sölvell, Ö. Strengthening Clusters and Competitiveness in Europe. The Role of
Cluster Organisations, the Cluster Observatory, 2012. Available online: https://www.google.com.hk/ url?
sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwjatNi3wp7LAhVBhSwKHa9HCWcQFggb MAA
&url=http%3a%2f%2fwww.clusterportal-bw.de%2fservice%2fpublikationen%2fclusterpolitik-undclusterpolitische-
massnahmen%2fpublikation%2fPublikationen%2fdownload%2fdokument%
2fstrengthening- clusters-and-competitiviness-in-europe%2f&usg=AFQjCNGM483M6JL2-3T08HLuEWhUY
NqvAA&sig2=lS6kD_sy6cBB-vSU0J6lXw (accessed on 21 November 2015).
37. Hisrich, R.D. Entrepreneurship/intrapreneurship. Am. Psychol. 1990, 45, 209–222. [CrossRef]
38. Burns, P. Entrepreneurship and Small Business; Palgrave MacMillan: Houndmills, UK, 2007.
39. Davidsson, P. The domain of entrepreneurship research: Some suggestions. In Book Cognitive
Approaches to Entrepreneurship Research; Katz, J.A., Shepherd, D.A., Elsevier, J.A.I., Eds.; Book Series:
Advances in Entrepreneurship, Firm Emergence and Growth, Emerald Insight; Available online:
http://www.emeraldinsight.com/doi/book/10.1016/S1074-7540(2003)6 (accessed on 21 November 2015).
40. Schuler, R.S.; Tarique, I.; Jackson, S.E. Managing Human Resourses in Cross-Border Aliancess, Advances in
Mergers and Acquisitions (Advances in Mergers and Acquisitions, Volume 3); Emerald Group Publishing Limited:
Bingley, UK; pp. 103–129.
41. Drucker, P. Innovation and Entrepreneurship, Practice and Principles; Harper&Row: New York, NY, USA, 1985.
42. A¯ bele, L.; L¯iduma, D.; Leita¯ne, I.;Mežinska, A. Analysis of factors forming competitive business environment
in cross-border region. Econ. Manag. 2012, 17, 1308–1313. [CrossRef]
43. Smallbone, D.; Welter, F. Cross-border entrepreneurship. Entrep. Reg. Dev. Int. J. 2012, 24, 43–63. [CrossRef]
44. Re´sko, D. Przedsi˛ebiorczo´s´c transgraniczna w wybranych jednostkach terytorialnych pogranicza
polsko-słowackiego. Stud. Reg. Lokalne 2010, 2, 121–131. (In Polish).
45. Smallbone, D.; Welter, F.; Xheneti, M. Cross-Border Entrepreneurship and Economic Development in Europe’s
Border; Edward Elgar: Cheltenham, UK; Northampton, MA, USA, 2012.
46. The project “Sustainable economic activities”, co-financed by the Operational programme of cross-border
co-operation Czech Republic—Poland 2007–2013. Available online: http://www.egtctritia.eu/pl/projekty/
nasze-projekty/zrownowazona-dzialalnosc-gospodarcza (accessed on 21 December 2015).
47. Report doing business, World Bank Group 2015. Available online: http://www.doingbusiness.org/
(accessed on 21 December 2015).
48. The project “Strategies for System Cooperation of Public Institutions of Moravian-Silesian Region,
the Voivodeship of Silesia and Opole” co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund
under the Operational Programme of Cross-Border Cooperation Czech Republic - Republic of Poland
2007–2013. Available online: http://www.slaskie.pl/strona_n.php?jezyk= pl&grupa=9&dzi=1312275679&
art=1312275911&id_menu=455 (accessed on 21 December 2015).
49. Szczepa ´nska-Woszczyna, K. Rola edukacji w rozwoju regionu, Polityka gospodarcza gminy (rozwój Zagł˛ebia
D ˛ abrowskiego wczoraj i dzi´s). Zeszyty Naukowe WSB 2001, 2, 149–159. (In Polish)
50. Services platform for cross-border cooperation between Czech and Polish SME. Available online:
http://www.cespolgroup.com/pl/ (accessed on 21 December 2015).
51. Platform for cooperation of Polish-Czech societies. Available online: http://www.anotak.info/pl/biznes
(accessed on 21 December 2015).
52. Szczepa ´nska-Woszczyna, K. Innovation process in the social space of the organization. Reg. Form. Dev. Stud.
2014, 3, 220–229.
160
Sustainability 2016, 8, 230
53. Klimczuk., A.; Klimczuk-Kocha´ nska, M.; Plawgo, B. Współpraca transgraniczna małych i ´srednich
przedsi˛ebiorstw jako czynnik rozwoju regionalnego na przykładzie podregionu białostocko-suwalskiego
i podregionu kro´snie ´nsko-przemyskiego w Polsce, obwodu Zakarpackiego na Ukrainie oraz obwodu
grodzie ´ nskiego na Białorusi. In book Współpraca transgraniczna małych i ´srednich przedsi˛ebiorstw jako czynnik
rozwoju regionalnego; Plawgo, B., Ed.; Białostocka Fundacja Kształcenia Kadr: Białystok, 2015; Available
online: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2604198 (accessed on 21 December 2015). (In Polish)
54. Kurowska-Pysz, J. Assessment of trends for the development of cross border cultural clusters.
Forum Sci. Oecon. 2014, 3, 31–51.
55. Kurowska-Pysz, J. Proces zarza˛dzania wiedza˛w klastrach—Kluczowe uwarunkowania. Mark. I Rynek 2015,
12, 17–23. (In Polish)
56. Thissen, M.; Oort, F.; Diodato, D.; Ruijs, A. Regional Competitiveness and Smart Specialization in Europe; Edward
Elgar Publishing Limited: Cheltenham, UK, 2013.
57. Szultka, S. Klastry w Sektorach Kreatywnych—Motory Rozwoju Miast i Regionów; Polska Agencja Rozwoju
Przedsi˛ebiorczo´sci: Warszawa, Poland, 2012. (In Polish)
© 2016 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
161
sustainability
Article
The Design of a Sustainable Location-Routing-Inventory
Model Considering Consumer Environmental Behavior
Jinhuan Tang 1,*, Shoufeng Ji 2 and Liwen Jiang 2
1 School of Economics and Management, Shenyang Aerospace University, Shenyang 110136, China
2 School of Business Administration, Northeast University, Shenyang 110169, China;
sfji@mail.neu.edu.cn (S.J.); 1310514@stu.neu.edu.cn (L.J.)
* Corresponding: jinhuan_tang@sau.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-151-4016-3732
Academic Editors: Adam Jabło ´ nski and Giuseppe Ioppolo
Received: 12 January 2016; Accepted: 19 February 2016; Published: 29 February 2016
Abstract: Our aim is to design a sustainable supply chain (SSC) network, which takes into
consideration consumer environmental behaviors (CEBs). CEBs not only affect consumers’ demand
for products with low carbon emissions, they also affect their willingness to pay premium prices for
products with low carbon emissions. We incorporate CEBs into the SSC network model involving
location, routing and inventory. Firstly, a multi-objective optimization model comprised of both the
costs and the carbon emissions of a joint location-routing-inventory model is proposed and solved,
using a multi-objective particle swarm optimization (MOPSO) algorithm. Then, a revenue function
including CEBs is presented on the basis of a Pareto set of the trade-off between costs and carbon
emissions. A computational experiment and sensitivity analysis are conducted, employing data from
the China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC). The results clearly indicate that our research
can be applied to actual supply chain operations. In addition, some practical managerial insights for
enterprises are offered.
Keywords: sustainable supply chain network; consumer environmental behaviors; locationrouting-
inventory; MOPSO
1. Introduction
Along with the heightened concerns over the past few decades relating to sustainable supply
chains (SSC), governments, enterprises and consumers are becoming increasingly aware of the need
to reduce carbon emissions. Governments have introduced a number of regulations, such as carbon
taxes, cap-and-trade mechanisms and carbon constraints to mandate carbon emission reductions in
SSC management [1]. In addition, a few socially responsible enterprises have engaged in voluntary
emission reduction programs. Companies such as BP and Nike have taken actions to reduce emissions
in order to improve their public image. Wal-Mart and Tesco require their suppliers to reveal their
carbon emissions on product labels, where they can be seen by consumers and society. In addition,
consumers with higher levels of environmental consciousness are willing to pay a premium price for
low carbon products [2–5]. The demand for low carbon products has become greater and greater [6–8].
It can be safely assumed that low carbon products will become more competitively priced in the future.
Clearly, the drive for environmental improvement is increasing.
Traditionally, a supply chain network design problem focuses on minimizing the fixed and
operational costs that companies directly incur. Only recently, however, have some studies started
taking carbon emissions into account [9–11]. Many studies indicate that there is a trade-off between the
environment and economics in a supply chain [12–14]. However, it is possible to significantly reduce
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211; doi:10.3390/su8030211 162 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
carbon emissions without greatly increasing costs, using proper supply chain operations [15,16]. In
general, there is a paradox between cost and carbon emissions in SSC management.
Companies are never going to reduce their carbon emissions until factors such as cost, profits,
brand awareness and consumer pressure are involved. Currently, the main drive for carbon emission
reduction can be classified into two categories. The first is mandatory emission reductions, which
includes features such as carbon taxes and carbon cap policies [17]. This approach to carbon emissions
is punitive. The alternative method is to encourage enterprises to voluntarily reduce their carbon
emissions. This encouragement, in turn, can take the form of two types of motivation. One type is
through policies such as carbon allowances and cap-and-trade mechanisms. The second type takes
on board market considerations. For example, studies have shown that green products have the
marketing potential to endow an enterprise with a good public image, which in turn can improve the
relevant products’ pricing structure or increase consumer demand [8,18]. Looking further into the
future, the effects of exploiting the marketing potential of products with low carbon emissions will
increase substantially. Creating a SSC network is both a challenge and an opportunity. Presumably, the
information already available to society at large has made consumers more environmentally mature,
and these mature consumers would like to purchase products with smaller carbon footprints. In this
study, we propose the design of a SSC network from a market-driven perspective. Specifically, the
purpose of this study is to optimize the profitability of a company through CEB. We decide on the
design of the SSC network after considering the number and location of warehouses, the routes from
manufacturers to warehouses and from warehouses to retailers, and the inventory polices of the
various facilities. Firstly, a multi-objective model is constructed to create a trade-off between cost
and carbon emissions. Then, a general revenue objective factoring in CEBs is modeled, based on the
relationship between cost and carbon emissions. This study allows us to achieve the best of both
worlds, i.e., maximizing the profits of companies, while reducing carbon emissions as much as possible.
These achievements also represent the main points of innovation in this paper.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the relevant literature.
Problem descriptions and assumptions are presented in Section 3. Section 4 describes the
multi-objective model that creates the trade-off between cost and carbon emissions, and then constructs
the general revenue objective function taking CEBs into consideration. The approach used as a solution
for the model is given in Section 5. Results of the computational experiment and a sensitivity analysis
are conducted in Section 6; the managerial insights are also illustrated in this section. Finally, our
conclusions are presented in Section 7.
2. Literature Review
A key driver of any supply chain is its distribution network. This network, however, is generally
also the main source of carbon emissions. The operations of a supply chain network consist of
three major components, namely location, routing and inventory (LRI). However, most existing
literature integrates only any two of the above, i.e., location-routing problems [19], inventory-routing
problems [20], and location-inventory problems [21], as their target topics. Ahmadi-Javid and Azad [22]
presented for the first time a model to simultaneously optimize location, routing and inventory
decisions in a supply chain network. Ahmadi-Javid and Seddighi [23] studied a ternary integration
problem that incorporated location, routing and inventory decisions in designing a multi-source
distribution network. They then solved the model using a three-phase heuristic. On the whole, very
few researchers have studied the ternary integration LRI problem, and fewer still have incorporated
carbon emissions into an LRI problem when designing a supply chain network. This is a very important
issue, which has unfortunately been largely ignored.
Numerous studies concentrate on the trade-off between the environment and the economy in
supply chain management [12,24]. According to the most recent papers, three types of research have
been conducted and corresponding suggestions made: (i) Translate carbon emissions into cost by
introducing carbon regulations, such as a carbon tax, cap-and-trade mechanisms, etc. Kroes et al. [25]
163
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
investigated the relationship between a firm’s environmental performance compliance and their
marketing success in the context of stringent cap-and-trade regulations. Benjaafar et al. [12] presented
a cost optimization model via translating carbon emissions into unit costs by carbon price. The two
studies proved that there is a close relationship between economic costs and carbon emissions. Similar
research was conducted by Hua et al. [24], which studied managing carbon footprints in an inventory
system under a carbon emission trading mechanism. (ii) A mandatory carbon cap is used to reduce
emissions. This policy specifically prohibits companies from emitting any carbon emissions in excess
of their carbon cap. Diabat et al. [26] proposed a mixed-integer program model with carbon cap
constraints when designing a supply chain network. A carbon-constraint economic order quantity
(EOQ) model was provided to reduce emissions by properly adjusting order quantities [16]. The effects
of carbon-constraint measures are significant. However, it is relatively difficult to implement such
policies, as they are currently unacceptable to many companies. Businesses, which are profit-driven,
lack the motivation to participate in this non-profitable activity. (iii) Provide a set of Pareto solutions,
which shows the trade-off between cost and carbon emissions. The advantage of this method is that it
can give a set of non-dominated solutions. In addition, the decision makers can choose their preferred
configuration. Wygonik and Goodchild [27] presented trade-offs between cost, service quality and the
carbon emissions of an urban delivery system. Wang et al. [28] provided a bi-objective optimization
model for a green supply chain network design. One of the two objectives was cost minimization;
the other was to minimize carbon emissions. The Pareto results showed that the bi-objective model
is an effective tool for solving this kind of problem. However, the terminal decision will be made by
managers, and thus, personal preferences will inevitably be involved.
The worldwide reduction framework would involve drawing more companies into carbon
reduction activities and also into assuming social responsibilities. In order to determine how to make
enterprises voluntarily reduce emissions in the context of an earnings-dominated market, it is first
necessary to learn how best to improve the potential motivation for corporations to reduce their
carbon emissions. The use of carbon labeling is an effective means to encourage consumers to buy
environmentally friendly products. There is, however, a definite need to better understand consumers’
responses to eco-labels [28]. Consumers’ willingness to pay a premium price for products with lower
carbon emissions has been shown to be increasing [4,29]. Vanclay et al. [30] defined three levels of
carbon labeling (from low to high) as green, yellow and black. They then found that after labeling, the
black-labeled (highest carbon emission) product sales decreased by six percent, while green-labeled
product sales increased by four percent, when all other conditions were basically unchanged. These
results imply that the potential effectiveness of carbon labels in emission reductions is significant.
However, green products usually cost more than conventional products, which in turn makes green
goods more expensive [3].The key issue is whether consumers will be willing to pay a premium price
for the green goods. If not, governments may have to subsidize producers who manufacture green
products [5]. Some studies have shown that the higher the CEBs, the higher the price consumers are
willing to pay for environmentally friendly products [2].
Economic globalization and rapid high-tech development have intensified market competition
to unprecedented levels. New patterns of product competition will emerge over the next few years,
and the manufacture of green products as part of that competition is an irresistible trend. Conrad [3]
studied the effects of consumer environmental concerns on price, choice of product and market share
in the context of duopoly. Liu et al. [8] proved that, as consumers’ environmental awareness increases,
retailers and manufacturers with superior eco-friendly operations will benefit in the long run. A model
considering the effect of environmental conscious consumers on firms’ adoption of cleaner technologies
showed that, as pollution intensifies, consumers play a much more positive role in the companies’
environmental activities. The consumers’ attitudes encourage firms to reduce carbon emissions, even
in the absence of emission regulations [7]. However, many studies focus on emission reduction
through governmental regulations, and rarely through market forces [31]. Actually, consumer response
164
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
and preference for greener products, as well as market competition, combine to strongly encourage
companies to adopt environmentally friendly operations.
By reviewing previous studies, we find that very little research has been conducted on LRI
optimization as a means to minimize carbon emissions. Fewer still have incorporated CEBs into a
revenue model. Indeed, most studies fail to properly integrate market-driven factors—in particular
CEBs—and LRI operations and revenue objectives with cost-environment trade off. In this paper, we
make the following contributions: (i) The concept of consumer environmental behaviors (CEBs) was
proposed and incorporated into a revenue function. CEBs not only affect consumers’ demand for low
carbon emission products, but also their willingness to pay a premium price for low carbon emission
products. (ii) A multi-objective mixed-integer formulation for the trade-off between cost and carbon
emissions was presented first. The solution was then found using the multi-objective particle swarm
optimization (MOPSO). Hence, a set of distributed Pareto optimal solutions can be obtained. On this
basis, revenue function can be maximized. (iii) We conduct a computational experiment based on
data from the China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) to test the presented models. Then,
the Pareto solutions are presented. In addition, a number of sensitivity analyses are implemented on
multiple variables. Hence, we obtain interesting managerial insights that may be of use to logistics
service firms.
3. Description and Assumptions
3.1. Problem Description
For a supply chain network consisting of manufacturers (M), warehouses (W) and retailers (R),
the location of warehouses is potentially significant. In addition, each warehouse has a specific capacity
level, which makes the supply chain network more realistic. The goals of our model are to choose
and allocate warehouses, schedule vehicle routes and determine an inventory policy to meet retailers’
demands taking into consideration CEBs. The framework of the problem is depicted in Figure 1.
􀈱
M1
M2
Manufacturers Warehouses Retailers
W1
W2
W3
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
Market􀀃
􀀧( 􀁓,􀁔 ,􀁗 )
Output
CO2 from􀀃Location􀍲Routing􀍲Inventory
Cost􀀃from􀀃Location􀍲Routing􀍲Inventory
􀁔 􀁓􀁛 Revenue
􀁗
Figure 1. The framework of supply chain network.
In Figure 1, the operations generate cost and CO2 in a supply chain network involving location,
routing and inventory. θ is the green level coefficient of products, which is decided by the CO2
emissions from the LRI operations, which can in turn be calculated by Equation (14); τ is the consumer
environmental behaviors (CEBs), and a larger τ indicates that consumers are willing to pay a higher
premium for greener products. CEBs can be calculated as τ “
şg
g τpgqβ, where τpgq is the CEBs of
consumer group g, β is a correction factor of CEBs over time. We assume β ě 1, because CEBs would
not decrease over time; g is the consumer group with the worst CEBs, and g is the consumer group
165
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
with the best CEBs. p is the price of the product, which is decided by θ and the CEBs τ. The market
demand of a product depends on p, θ and τ. Conversely, operation-induced emissions and cost will
be influenced by the market, which is important, especially in a situation of oversupply. To maximize
profits, supply chain enterprises will certainly endeavor to meet consumers’ preferences, so as to
improve their businesses’ performance.
3.2. Assumptions
We assume that the consumers are under symmetric information regarding products’ carbon
emissions. With the preferences displayed by CEBs, we aim to find the optimal supply chain network
design and operational strategy.
(i) In this paper, the CEB choices focus on the carbon emissions from the LRI, including sourcing,
production and/or recovery. It is reasonable to choose supply chain services as the study object,
as they represent a major source of carbon emissions.
(ii) There is no difference among delivery routes, and the road conditions are nearly the same. In other
words, the carbon emissions and costs are only affected by the distance travelled.
(iii) Each warehouse is assumed to follow a pQ, Rq inventory policy. That is, when the inventory of a
warehouse reaches the reorder point R, a fixed quantity Q is ordered from the upper stream plant.
(iv) The discussed products/services are in an oversupplied market. CEBs are in positive correlation
with market demand. We assume the consumer demand function is expressed as:
Dppx, θ, τq “ D0 ´λ1px ` 1
2λ2τθ (1)
where D0 is the initial demand without considering CEBs or a premium for greener products, λ1
is the market inverse demand coefficient, λ2 is the attraction coefficient with the environmentally
friendly level of products, and τ is the consumers’ environmental preference for low carbon products.
Obviously, the market demand is a decreasing function of price, and an increasing function of θ and τ.
4. The Model
4.1. A Multi-Objective Model for Cost and Carbon Emissions
There is a trade-off between cost and carbon emissions in supply chain operations. Generally, a set
of optimal Pareto solutions pcx, exq can be obtained, and particularly, the extreme values on the Pareto
curve are pc, eq and pc, eq. The aim of this paper is to find the optimal solution pcx
˚, ex
˚q in the supply
chain; one which will maximize profits while taking CEBs into consideration. For these operations, we
should make the following decisions:
(i) Location decisions—how many warehouses should be opened, and where to locate the
opened warehouses.
(ii) Routing decisions—how to assign the vehicle routes from manufacturers to warehouses (M-to-W)
and from warehouses to Retailers (W-to-R).
(iii) Inventory decisions—what is the order quantity, and how many safety stocks should
be maintained?
(iv) What is the most appropriate level of green to choose?
Thus, the decision variables can be denoted as
yj “
#
1, if warehouse j is opened
0, otherwise
, j P J
xr
ji
“
#
1, if retailer i is assigned to warehouse j
0, otherwise
, i P I, j P J
166
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
xp
kj
“
#
1, if warehousej is assigned to manufacture k
0, otherwise
, j P J, k P K
zmiv “
#
1, ifmprecedes i in the route of vehicle v
0, otherwise , @m P pI Y Jq, i P I.
Qj is the order quantity of warehouse j.
The multi-objective function includes cost and carbon emissions from location, routing and
inventory. First, the cost is composed using the following terms:
(i) Location cost. The cost of warehouse location is
ř
jPJ
fjyj, where fj is the single cost of opening
warehouse j.
(ii) Routing cost occurs in the distribution from M-to-W and from warehouse to retailer (W-to-R),
which are
ř
kPK
ř
jPJ
t1dkjxp
kj and
ř
jPJ
ř
iPI
ř
mPpIYJq
t2dmizmiv, respectively, where t1 is the M-to-W routing
cost per distance; dkj is the distance from manufacturer k to warehouse j; t2 is W-to-R routing cost
per distance; and dmi is the distance from warehouse j (or retailer k k) to retailer k1
(iii) Inventory cost. Working inventory is
ř
jPJ
ř
iPI
pho
ř
iPI μixr
ij
Qj
` hj
Qj
2
q, and safety stock is
ř
jPJ
hjzα
c
Lj
ř
iPI
σ2i
xr
ji [22], where ho is the ordering cost, μi is the demand by retailer i, hj is the
hold cost per unit; Lj is the lead time of DC j; zα is left α-percentile of standard normal random
variable Z, i.e., PpZ ď zαq “ α (α is the desired percentage of retailers’ orders that should be
satisfied); σ2i
is the variance of demand from retailer i.
The carbon emissions are composed of the following terms:
(i) Cřarbon emissions from facilities. The carbon emissions of a warehouse location can be denoted as
jPJ
ˆ fjyj, where ˆ fj is the carbon emissions of building warehouse j.
(ii) Carbon emissions from routing. The routing emissions from the M-to-W and W-to-R
transportations are denoted as
ř
kPK
ř
jPJ
ˆt1dkjxp
kj and
ř
jPJ
ř
iPI
ř
mPpIYJq
ˆt2dmizmiv, respectively, where ˆt1
is the M-to-W carbon emissions per distance, and ˆt2 is the carbon emissions per distance from
warehouse j (or retailer k) to retailer k1 .
(iii) Carbon emissions from inventory. The inventory emissions come from the working inventory and
safety stock, which are
ř
jPJ
ř
iPI
ˆh
j
Qj
2
and
ř
jPJ
ˆh
jzα
c
Lj
ř
iPI
σ2i
xr
ji, respectively, where ˆh j is the carbon
emissions per holding inventory. It is worth mentioning that carbon emissions from inventory
mainly refer to the energy consumption and product emissions during storage.
(iv) Other emissions, including emissions from purchasing, production and recovery. The purchasing
emission is Pur1.
ř
iPI
μi, where Pur1 is carbon emissions from purchase per unit. The production
emission is Pn1.
ř
iPI
μi, where Pn1 is carbon emissions from production per unit. The recovery
emission is Rcy1.
ř
iPI
μi, where Rcy1 is carbon emissions from recovery per unit.
The multi-objective problem is formulated as follows:
min cx “ p
ř
jPJ
fjyj `
ř
kPK
ř
jPJ
t1dkjxp
kj
`
ř
jPJ
ř
iPI
ř
mPpIYJq
t2dmizmiv `
ř
jPJ
ř
iPI
pho
ř
iPI μixr
ji
Qj
`hj
Qj
2
q`
ř
jPJ
hjzα
c
Lj
ř
iPI
σ2i
xr
ji
q{
ř
iPI
μi
(2)
167
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
min ex “ př
jPJ
ˆ fjyj ` ř
kPK
ř
jPJ
ˆt1dkjxp
kj
` ř
jPJ
ř
iPI
ř
mPpIYJq
ˆt2dmizmiv ` ř
jPJ
ř
iPI
ˆh
j
Qj
2
`ř
jPJ
ˆh
jzα
c
Lj
ř
iPI
σ2i
xr
ji
q{ř
iPI
μi
(3)
s.t. Qj ` zα
d
Lj
ÿ
iPI
σ2i
xr
ji
ď Nj, @j P J (4)
ÿ
iPI
ÿ
mPpIYJq
μizmiv ď Vc, @m P pI Y Jq (5)
ÿ
vPV
ÿ
mPpIYJq
zmiv “ 1, @i P I (6)
ÿ
jPJ
ÿ
iPI
zjiv ď 1, @v P V (7)
ÿ
mPpIYJq
zmiv ´
ÿ
mPpIYJq
zimv “ 0, @i P I, @v P V, @m P pI Y Jq (8)
Riv ´ Rmv `pnr ˆ zmivq ď nr ´1, @i P I, @m P pI Y Jq, @v P V (9)
yj “ t0, 1u , @j P J, @n P Nj (10)
xp
kj
“ t0, 1u, @k P K, @j P J (11)
xr
ji
“ t0, 1u, @j P J, @i P I (12)
zmiv “ t0, 1u , @m P pI Y Jq, i P I, @v P V. (13)
Equation (2) minimizes the cost of the CLRIP, where the first three terms are the fixed location
cost, inventory cost, and routing cost, respectively. Equation (3) minimizes the carbon emissions.
Equation (4) restricts the inventory in warehouse j to remain within its capacity Nj. Equation (5)
restricts the load of each vehicle to within its capacity Vc. Equation (6) ensures one and only one
vehicle serves any retailer. Equation (7) requires that each vehicle serves no more than one warehouse.
The flow conservation Equation (8) states that a vehicle entering a node must also leave the node, so as
to ensure the route is circular. The sub-tour elimination Equation (9) guarantees that each tour contains
a warehouse, from which the tour originates and some retailers [32], where Riv is an auxiliary variable
defined for retailer i for sub-tour elimination in the route of vehicle v, nr is the number of retailers.
Equations (10)–(13) enforce the decision variables to remain within their respective domains.
4.2. The Revenue Model Considering CEBs
This study focuses on the effects of CEBs on the task of designing a supply chain network, which
includes making LRI decisions. CEBs not only affect consumers’ willingness to pay premium prices
for greener products, but they also affect the market demand for such products. This willingness to
pay varies greatly across industries and consumer groups and also changes in intensity over time [4].
If anything, carbon emissions due to logistics operations have been a concern for a considerable length
of time, as these operations are a major source of emissions. We are interested in determining how to
maximize earnings, as well as how to improve competition, through the influence of CEBs in three
supply chain network structures which include location, routing and inventory considerations.
As non-green products have already been in circulation for many years, the general optimal
decision is based on cost minimization. In this study, however, in addition to cost, we also consider
carbon emissions as a benchmark. There is a terminal consumer group with an average CEB in the
market. The green level θ is closely related to the carbon emissions from the supply chain. It has
been proven that the carbon emissions and cost are in negative correlation, and thus, we assume that
168
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
the optimal cost corresponds to a poor performance in relation to carbon emissions, and vice versa.
Specifically, with an operation map, we can connect inputs rc, cs to corresponding outputs re, es. Then
θ can be denoted as
θ “ e{ex (14)
where ex is the actual carbon emission, and thus (θ´1) is the carbon abatement ratio. p is the price of
non-green products, pc, eq represents the cost and carbon emissions, and px is the price with pcx, exq.
As we know, the marginal cost of carbon reduction increases by degrees. The “low hanging fruit”
effect also indicates that initial basic improvement is easier, but the cleanup is harder. Thus, the above
situation is considered, and the price of a product with green level θ is
px “ pθ2 (15)
It is worth noting that product price is a quadratic function of θ, since the environmental
improvement has an increasing marginal cost, and production price is worked out to the costing.
The quadratic function is commonly used to describe the cost related to the product’s environmental
improvement. That is, each additional increment of emissions reduction is more difficult, and hence
costlier to achieve [8]. Also, from the market’s perspective, consumers with CEBs are willing to pay a
premium price for green products. The greener the product, the more expensive it will be. In addition,
for an advanced green product, too, even a small improvement will result in a significant price increase.
This increase is deemed to be reasonable.
The aim is to find an optimal portfolio pcx, exq under this context. The basic profit function can be
defined as
ź
“ ppx ´ cx ´ c0qD ´ε (16)
where constant c0 is the unit cost of raw materials, and ε is other expenditure, which can be ignored in
most cases.
Substituting Equations (1)–(15) into Equation (16), then:
ź
“ ppθ2 ´ cx ´ c0qpD0 ´λ1pθ2 ` 1
2λ2τθq (17)
Based on Equation (17), if there is no CEB, the enterprise loses the motivation to reduce carbon
emissions, which is consistent with the traditional model. We assume the traditional model has revenue
of ΠC, with the only measure being the cost, and we mark it as model PC. In this condition, θ “ 1,
τ “ 0, thus:
ΠC “ pp ´ c ´ c0qpD0 ´λ1pq (18)
Enterprises have an incentive to join in carbon reduction practices only when Π ´ Πc ą 0.
c0 is the same constant in Π and Πc, and thus can be ignored. Then, enterprises will
participate in carbon emissions when ppθ2 ´ cxqpD0 ´λ1pθ2 ` 1
2λ2τθq ą pp ´ cqpD0 ´λ1pq, and thus
cx ă pθ2 ´
pp ´ cqpD0 ´λ1pq
D0 ´ λ1pθ2 ` 1
2λ2τθ
. Actually, θ is a function of ex; the relationship between cx and ex is
important, and it will be solved in the next section.
5. Solving Approach
5.1. Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm
The particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm was first proposed by Kennedy and
Eberhart [32]. It is a population-based optimization technique and is becoming very popular, due
mainly to its simplicity of implementation and ability to quickly converge to a reasonably good
solution [33]. It has been extensively applied to many complex network optimization problems. In the
PSO heuristic procedure, a swarm of particles is retained in the search process. Each particle follows
169
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
a specific trajectory in the search space, and each step of the particle determines a trial solution.
Each particle has knowledge of its previous best experience, as well as the best global experience
of the entire swarm. The current best fitness of, i.e., the best solution found so far by particle p
is represented by xpbestp , while the global best fitness among all particles is represented by xgbest.
The velocity and position of particle p at iteration (time) t in dimension d are represented by vpdptq
and xpdptq, respectively. Each particle updates its direction at time t according to Equation (19) in the
following [32]:
vpdptq “ ωvpdpt ´1q` c1r1ptqpxpbestpd
´xpdptqq` c2r2ptqpxgbest ´xpdptqq (19)
where ω is the inertia influencing the local and global ability of the particle; usually a value between
0.2 to 0.6 is recommended; c1 and c2 are cognitive and social learning rates, respectively, and r1ptq and
r2ptq are two uniform random numbers such that r1, r2 P r0, 1s.
The position of particle p is then updated according to Equation (20) in the following
xpdptq “ xpdpt ´1q` vpdptq (20)
The update of velocity and the position process is repeated for every dimension and for all
particles in the swarm. Eventually the swarm as a whole, like a flock of birds collectively foraging for
food, is likely to move close to an optimum of the fitness function [33].
5.2. The Hybrid PSO
The multi-objective model contains location and routing assignments involving binary
decisions. Multi-objective programming problems with binary variables cannot be directly processed
using the Multi-objective Particle Swarm Optimization (MOPSO) heuristic procedure. Following
Shankar et al. [33], the velocity of a particle should be modified if xd is binary. The modified velocity
can be updated as:
vpdptq “ vpdpt ´1q` r1ptqpxpbestpd
´ xpdpt ´1qq` r2ptqpxgbest ´ xpdpt ´1qq (21)
where r1ptq and r2ptq are two random numbers. The position of particle p can be updated as:
xpdptq “
$&
%
0, If ρpd ă spvpdptqq
1, If ρpd ě spvpdptqq
(22)
where ρpd is a uniformly distributed random number such that ρpd P r0, 1s and spvpdptqq
is the probability threshold given by spvpdq “ 1
1 `expp´vpdptqq . In the MOPSO heuristic
procedure, the velocity and positions of the continuous particles are updated according to
Equations (19) and (20), respectively, while those of the binary variables are updated according
to Equations (21) and (22), respectively.
5.3. An Improved Constraint of the MOPSO
In order to improve the ability of the heuristic procedure to search the edges crossing unconnected
parts of the feasible region, and also to obtain global non-dominated solutions, some infeasible
solutions that are near the feasible solutions are retained in the swarm at the beginning of the search
process. A constraint that restricts the infeasibility degree of the constraints is used. At the end of the
solution process, all particles retained in the swarm must be feasible. Any infeasible particles will be
deleted from the external file gradually, throughout the progress of the search process. A dynamic
self-adapting process is needed to control the infeasibility degree in the heuristic procedure. In the
multi-objective programming model, the th inequality constraint can be written as g
pxq ď 0 and the
’th equality constraint can be written as h1 pxq ´ δ “ 0. The infeasibility of a trail solution x can be
quantized as follows:
170
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
Cpxq “
ÿ

maxpg
pxq, 0q`
ÿ
1
maxp|h1 pxq´ δ| , 0q (23)
In Equation (23), δ is a permissible deviation, such that δ ą 0 and is very small. If x P X, Cpxq “ 0.
A dynamic infeasibility threshold ε is used that guarantees the final solutions are all feasible. This
threshold is defined as:
ε “
#
ε0 ˆp1 ´5t{4Tq, ift ď 0.8T
0, if t ą 0.8T
(24)
where ε0 is the initial allowable deviation of all the constraints. Obviously, ε decreases with the
increase in the number of evolutionary generations. In the searching process, the solution x is retained
if Cpxq ď ε; otherwise it is discarded.
5.4. Selecting the Optimal Particles
The solution of the MOPSO optimization problem is different from a single objective optimization
problem. With a single objective problem, it is easy to know which particles are the personal best
(pbest) and global best (gbest). With the MOPSO, however, it is difficult to judge which particles are
pbest and gbest, because the particles are often non-dominate solutions. However, it is important to
pick suitable pbest and gbest particles, since each particle must change its position, as guided by pbest
and gbest. Each particle moves toward the non-dominated frontier during the search process [34].
The selection for pbest is relatively simple compared to gbest. A method called Prandom is used
in this study, according to which a single pbest is maintained. Pbest is replaced if a new value < pbest,
or else, if the new value is found to be mutually non-dominating with pbest, one of the two is randomly
selected to be the new best [35]. Before the selection for gbest, there are still some works to illustrate.
In the MOPSO algorithm, we usually store the non-dominate solutions in archive, and the archive has
a limited capacity. Thus, in order to maintain the archive, the crowding distance should be measured
as a base for reserving or discarding non-dominate solutions. The crowding distance dtij can be
calculated as:
dtij “
gffe
ÿk
l“1
flpXiq´ flpXjq2 (25)
where flpXq denotes the objective functions in the dimension l. According to Equation (25), the
crowding distance matrix can be indicated as:
DT “
»
————–
dt11 dt12 ¨ ¨ ¨ dt1n
dt21 dt22 ¨ ¨ ¨ dt2n
...
...
...
...
dtn1 dtn2 ¨ ¨ ¨ dtnn
fi
ffi ffi ffi ffi fl
(26)
where n is the number of non-dominate solutions in the archive. Set S and A represents the populations
with particles and archive storing, non-dominate solutions. The particles in S can be divided into two
types. One set (S1) is comprised of particles that are dominated by at least one of the non-dominate
solutions in A. The other set (S2) is comprised of particles that are not dominated by any one solution
in A. S “ S1 Y S2. In the same way, archive A can also be divided into three types. Set A1 is the
non-dominate solutions, which dominate at least one of the particles in S. Set A2 is the non-dominate
solutions which have the same position with the particles in S. Set A3 is comprised of the other
non-dominate solutions. A “ A1 Y A2 Y A3. Figure 2 shows the mapping relations of S and A.
171
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
Figure 2. The mapping relationship of archive A and population S.
For the MOPSO algorithm, the diversity and convergence of population are contradictory issues.
One contradiction is the diversity, which guarantees the global best while avoiding the local optimal.
The other is the convergence, which promotes particles approaching the Pareto frontier as far as
possible. Hence, for particles in S1, if we select non-dominate solutions in A1, which dominate the
particles as gbest, the search engines would speed up. However, this can lead to a premature problem.
For particles in S2, the global best selection strategy would lead those particles moving to less crowded
regions to improve the capability of a global search.
Regardless, each non-dominate solution in the archive has its unique feature. To maintain the
diversity of an algorithm, each should have a chance to become a global guide. When paired with these
factors, two properties, fri and fpi, are given for non-dominate solutions in the archive. fri denotes how
often the non-dominate solution is selected as gbest, and fpi denotes how many particles in the current
population select the non-dominate solution as gbest. Generally, the size of fpi should be restricted.
If one gbest is selected by too many particles, the result would be particles converging to a limited
region. Based on our experience, we use fpi ď 0.05N, where N is the number of particles [36].
Putting the above pieces together, the global best can be selected as follows:
(i) For each particle in S1, we select a non-dominate solution that randomly dominates the particle
from A1 as gbest, but fpi ď 0.05N is necessary. If no solution is found, the gbest should be selected
from the A1 with greater crowding distance and smaller fri.
(ii) For each particle in S2, a random probability model is employed to select gbest from the A2 with
greater crowding distance and smaller fri.
The pseudo-code of MOPSO algorithm depicting the entire process is given as follows:
(1) Initialize positions and velocities of all particles.
(2) Set the current particle position as Pbest.
(3) While (iter_count < T)
(4) for each particle (i = 1:n)
(5) Select a gbest from the archive.
(6) Update velocity and position.
(7) Evaluate the fitness values of the current particle i.
(8) Update the pbest of each particle by comparison criteria.
(9) End for
(10) Update archive by non-dominate solutions.
(11) For each particle in archive
172
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
(12) If fpi ď 0.05N
(13) Select a dominate solution with greater crowding distance and smaller fri from archive as
gbest randomly.
(14) End if
(15) End for
(16) Output
(17) End while
6. Computational Experiment
In this section, we evaluate the presented model using a set of numerical data from a real case.
The problem is solved by the MOPSO method with Matlab 7.01 on a PC with Intel core i5 and 2.4 GHz.
Then, the effects of CEBs and green levels on the decision process are comprehensively analyzed.
Finally, some managerial insights are presented.
6.1. Case Study
We consider the experiment based on a case study from the petrochemical industry. Specifically,
data from the Northeast Chemical Sales Company of the China National Petroleum Corporation
(CNPC) (Beijing, China) was studied. CNPC is a large group, and its supply chain network
is responsible for transporting petrochemicals from plants, via warehouses, to retailers. This
transportation operation involves location, routing and inventory decisions, as well as the creation
of considerable carbon emissions. In this paper, a section of the operational data was analyzed.
Specifically, this case study involves two plants, five potential warehouses with retailing functions
and eight retailers. Each trajectory is relative to a routing cost and the amount of carbon emission.
The routings and distances are shown in Figure 3. The parameters of the warehouses and retailers are
listed in Tables 1–3. In addition, the market inverse demand coefficient is set as 5500, and the attraction
coefficient with the environment level of products is set as 5000. CEB is 1, and the routing cost per
distance of M-to-W andW-to-R are all equal to q. The order cost is 500, and the capacity of each vehicle
is 1500. In addition, ˆ f A
j
“ 29.3Nj, the carbon emissions per distance are 0.17, and the carbon emissions
per inventory are 0.00276.
Table 1. The parameters of potential warehouses.
Beijing Tianjin Cangzhou Jinan Zhengzhou
Lead time(days) 3 5 6 4 8
Demand variance 12 14 9 11 8
Service level 95% 95% 95% 95% 95%
Table 2. The area and fixed location cost of potential DC.
Area of Location (m2) Fixed Location Cost (¥) Hold Cost (¥/ton Day)
Beijing 3000 2,000,000 0.3
Tianjin 3600 1,800,000 0.25
Cangzhou 4000 1,120,000 0.3
Jinnan 4200 1,560,000 0.25
Zhengzhou 5000 1,870,000 0.3
173
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
Table 3. The parameters of retailers.
Beijing Tianjin Baoding Cangzhou Shijiazhuang Jinan Liaocheng Linyi Qingdao Xinyang Zhengzhou Taiyuan Yuncheng
Initial demand 430 416 463 577 506 509 522 439 536 696 589 554 694
Service level 92% 91% 95% 95% 90% 98% 91% 94% 95% 95% 95% 95% 90%
Demand variance 9 12 7 8 14 6 6 9 9 11 9 7 9
174
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
􀈱
Daqing
Fushun
Qingdao
Xinyang
Zhengzhou
Beijing
Tianjin
Shijiaz
huang
Baoding
Cangzhou
Jinan
Liaocheng
Yuncheng
Taiyuan
29
Plants
Potential􀀃warehouses
retailers
Linyi
􀀕 􀀕 􀀚Routing􀀃from􀀃plants􀀃to􀀃warehouses
􀀛 􀀜 Routing􀀃from􀀃warehouses􀀃to􀀃retailers
􀀙 􀀘 Routing􀀃from􀀃retailers􀀃to􀀃retailers
Figure 3. The network of two plants, five potential warehouses and 14 retailers.
6.2. Numerical Analysis
According to the above data and the approach used to solve the question in Section 5, the
trade-off between cost and carbon emissions can be shown as Figure 4.The result provides decision
makers with decidedly indifferent choices. In conclusion, all the points on the Pareto line are
the solutions, but the managers themselves cannot directly decide. If CEBs are incorporated, the
optimal solution is unique (Figure 5). Clearly, revenue first increases and then decreases with
increasing carbon emissions. The increasing gradient is greater than the decreasing gradient.
This result illustrates that a proper carbon reduction policy can improve corporate revenue, but
excessive carbon reduction activities would have a negative impact. Figure 5 shows that the
maximum attainable revenue is ¥601,230,000. The optimal configuration can be shown as follows:
The location decision is to open Cangzhou, Jinan, and Zhengzhou. The routing decision is
divided into two parts. (i) As regards the routing from plants to warehouses, the first decision
is that Daqing serves Cangzhou and Jinan, while Fushun serves Zhengzhou. (ii) Considering
transportation from warehouses to retailers, the routing schedule of the Cangzhou warehouse is
Cangzhou-Tianjin-Beijing-Baoding-Cangzhou-Shijiazhuang-Taiyuan-Cangzhou. The routing schedule
for the Jinan warehouse is Jinan-Liaocheng-Linyi-Qingdao-Jinan, and the routing schedule for the
Zhengzhou warehouse is Zhengzhou-Xinyang-Yuncheng-Zhengzhou. The order quantities of the
three warehouses are 4792, 3156 and 2834 tons, respectively.
We are interested in how CEBs affect companies’ decision making. As we know, CEBs mainly
affect demand. The effect of consumers’ environmental preference on demand for products with
different carbon emissions is shown in Figure 6. We vary the CEBs from 1 to 1.8 and obtain a series of
demand vs. carbon emissions. Clearly, the curves move from left to right as the coefficient increases
from 1 to 1.8, which implies that with the same carbon emission levels, larger CEBs lead to greater
175
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
demand. This is due to the fact that when consumers pay closer attention to environmental protection,
enterprises are more likely to take actions that will improve their environmental protection levels. Then,
consumers with greater environmental awareness will buy more products from those enterprises with
superior eco-friendly operations. This is a virtuous cycle. However, the marginal cost of implementing
environmental improvements increases by degrees. As we know, the ultimate goal of enterprise
management is to maximize benefits. Similarly, we adjust the carbon emissions variable to analyze
the effect of CEBs on revenue (Figure 7). Clearly, revenue increases as the CEBs move from 1 to
1.8. However, the degree of revenue growth is clearly slower than the increasing CEBs. That is to
say, the initial improvement brought about by the CEBs greatly affects the operation of supply chain
enterprises, but this effect will weaken because of the high costs associated with further reductions of
carbon emissions.
􀀓􀀑􀀖􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀗 􀀓􀀑􀀗􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀘􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀙 􀀓􀀑􀀙􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀚 􀀓􀀑􀀚􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀛 􀀓􀀑􀀛􀀘
􀀔􀀓􀀓􀀑􀀛
􀀔􀀓􀀓􀀑􀀜
􀀦􀁄􀁕􀁅􀁒􀁑􀀃􀁈􀁐􀁌􀁖􀁖􀁌􀁒􀁑􀁖􀀃􀁓􀁈􀁕􀀃􀁘􀁑􀁌􀁗􀀋􀁗􀁒􀁑􀀌
􀀦􀁒􀁖􀁗􀀃􀁓􀁈􀁕􀀃􀁘􀁑􀁌􀁗􀀋􀌞􀀌
􀀃
􀀳􀁄􀁕􀁈􀁗􀁒􀀃􀁏􀁌􀁑􀁈
􀀸􀁗􀁒􀁓􀁌􀁄􀀃􀁏􀁌􀁑􀁈
Figure 4. Pareto optimal curve between cost and carbon emissions.
􀀓􀀑􀀖􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀗 􀀓􀀑􀀗􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀘􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀙 􀀓􀀑􀀙􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀚 􀀓􀀑􀀚􀀘
􀀔􀀑􀀘
􀀕
􀀕􀀑􀀘
􀀖
􀀖􀀑􀀘
􀀗
􀀗􀀑􀀘
􀀘
􀀘􀀑􀀘
􀀙
􀀙􀀑􀀘
􀁛􀀃􀀔􀀓􀀛
􀁆􀁄􀁕􀁅􀁒􀁑􀀃􀁈􀁐􀁌􀁖􀁖􀁌􀁒􀁑􀁖􀀃􀁓􀁈􀁕􀀃􀁘􀁑􀁌􀁗􀀋􀁎􀁊􀀌
􀁕􀁈􀁙􀁈􀁑􀁘􀁈􀀋􀌞􀀌
Figure 5. The relationship between carbon emissions and revenue.
176
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
􀀓􀀑􀀖􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀗 􀀓􀀑􀀗􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀘􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀙 􀀓􀀑􀀙􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀚 􀀓􀀑􀀚􀀘
􀀓􀀑􀀛
􀀓􀀑􀀜
􀀔
􀀔􀀑􀀔
􀀔􀀑􀀕
􀀔􀀑􀀖
􀀔􀀑􀀗
􀀔􀀑􀀘
􀀔􀀑􀀙
􀀔􀀑􀀚
􀁛􀀃􀀔􀀓􀀘
􀀦􀁄􀁕􀁅􀁒􀁑􀀃􀁈􀁐􀁌􀁖􀁖􀁌􀁒􀁑􀁖􀀃􀁓􀁈􀁕􀀃􀁘􀁑􀁌􀁗􀀋􀁎􀁊􀀌
􀀧􀁈􀁐􀁄􀁑􀁇􀀋􀁗􀁒􀁑􀀌
􀀃
􀀃
􀀦􀀨􀀥􀁖􀀠􀀔
􀀦􀀨􀀥􀁖􀀠􀀔􀀑􀀕
􀀦􀀨􀀥􀁖􀀠􀀔􀀑􀀗
􀀦􀀨􀀥􀁖􀀠􀀔􀀑􀀙
􀀦􀀨􀀥􀁖􀀠􀀔􀀑􀀛
Figure 6. The demand in different consumer environmental preferences varying with carbon emissions.
􀀓􀀑􀀖􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀗 􀀓􀀑􀀗􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀘􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀙 􀀓􀀑􀀙􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀚 􀀓􀀑􀀚􀀘
􀀔
􀀕
􀀖
􀀗
􀀘
􀀙
􀀚
􀀛
􀁛􀀃􀀔􀀓􀀛
􀀦􀁄􀁕􀁅􀁒􀁑􀀃􀁈􀁐􀁌􀁖􀁖􀁌􀁒􀁑􀁖􀀃􀁓􀁈􀁕􀀃􀁘􀁑􀁌􀁗􀀋􀁎􀁊􀀌
􀁕􀁈􀁙􀁈􀁑􀁘􀁈􀀋􀁗􀁒􀁑􀀌
􀀃
􀀃
􀀦􀀨􀀥􀁖􀀠􀀔
􀀦􀀨􀀥􀁖􀀠􀀔􀀑􀀕
􀀦􀀨􀀥􀁖􀀠􀀔􀀑􀀗
􀀦􀀨􀀥􀁖􀀠􀀔􀀑􀀙
􀀦􀀨􀀥􀁖􀀠􀀔􀀑􀀛
Figure 7. The revenue in different consumer environmental preferences varying with carbon emissions.
We assume that product pricing is a function of carbon emissions. However, it is not a hard and
absolute fact that pricing is the single, key factor. Our analysis (Figure 8) shows that higher prices
generate greater revenue. What is important is that the higher the price of a product, the bigger the
revenue will be obtained with lower carbon emissions. This illustrates that a higher price for green
products can stimulate a reduction in carbon emissions, but that higher price can also curb product
demand (Figure 9). Clearly, product pricing is increasing with a reduction in carbon emissions. When
the price increases, the product demand decreases. In this case, the consumer’s willingness to pay is
the most important factor. Hence, the enterprise should encourage consumers to improve their CEBs,
and pay closer attention to purchasing green products.
177
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
􀀓􀀑􀀖􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀗 􀀓􀀑􀀗􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀘􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀙 􀀓􀀑􀀙􀀘 􀀓􀀑􀀚 􀀓􀀑􀀚􀀘
􀀓
􀀕
􀀗
􀀙
􀀛
􀀔􀀓
􀀔􀀕
􀁛􀀃􀀔􀀓􀀛
􀀦􀁄􀁕􀁅􀁒􀁑􀀃􀁈􀁐􀁌􀁖􀁖􀁌􀁒􀁑􀁖􀀃􀁓􀁈􀁕􀀃􀁘􀁑􀁌􀁗􀀋􀁎􀁊􀀌
􀁕􀁈􀁙􀁈􀁑􀁘􀁈􀀋􀌞􀀌
􀀃
􀀃
􀁓􀁕􀁌􀁆􀁈􀀠􀀜
􀁓􀁕􀁌􀁆􀁈􀀠􀀔􀀓
􀁓􀁕􀁌􀁆􀁈􀀠􀀔􀀔
􀁓􀁕􀁌􀁆􀁈􀀠􀀔􀀕
􀁓􀁕􀁌􀁆􀁈􀀠􀀔􀀖
Figure 8. The revenue vs. carbon emissions in different product pricing.
􀀘 􀀔􀀓 􀀔􀀘 􀀕􀀓 􀀕􀀘 􀀖􀀓 􀀖􀀘 􀀗􀀓 􀀗􀀘
􀀓􀀑􀀖
􀀓􀀑􀀖􀀘
􀀓􀀑􀀗
􀀓􀀑􀀗􀀘
􀀓􀀑􀀘
􀀓􀀑􀀘􀀘
􀀓􀀑􀀙
􀀓􀀑􀀙􀀘
􀀓􀀑􀀚
􀁆􀁄􀁕􀁅􀁒􀁑􀀃􀁈􀁐􀁌􀁖􀁖􀁌􀁒􀁑􀁖􀀃􀁓􀁈􀁕􀀃􀁘􀁑􀁌􀁗􀀋􀀮􀁊􀀌
􀁓􀁕􀁒􀁇􀁘􀁆􀁗􀀃􀁓􀁕􀁌􀁆􀁌􀁑􀁊􀀋􀌞􀀌
􀀃
􀀃
􀀔
􀀕
􀀖
􀀗
􀀘
􀀙
􀀚
􀀛
􀀜
􀁛􀀃􀀔􀀓􀀗
􀁓􀁕􀁒􀁇􀁘􀁆􀁗􀀃􀁇􀁈􀁐􀁄􀁑􀁇􀀋􀁗􀁒􀁑􀀌
􀁆􀁄􀁕􀁅􀁒􀁑􀀃􀁈􀁐􀁌􀁖􀁖􀁌􀁒􀁑􀁖
􀁓􀁕􀁒􀁇􀁘􀁆􀁗􀀃􀁇􀁈􀁐􀁄􀁑􀁇
Figure 9. The relationship between product pricing -carbon emissions, and product
pricing-product demand.
6.3. Managerial Insights
In the current business climate, enterprises and consumers have gradually come to recognize the
importance of environmental protection. Both businesses and consumers are more inclined to make an
effort to reduce carbon emissions. In particular, consumers with greater environmental awareness are
happy to pay a premium price for low carbon emission products. This willingness, which is based on
increased environmental awareness, provides an opportunity for logistics enterprises. Our study is
consistent with the work of Liu et al. [8], which found that, with consumers’ greater environmental
awareness, more of them are willing to pay higher prices for low carbon emission products. In turn,
the enterprises that produce those products can earn greater revenue.
In addition, the companies that produce low carbon emissions should also make a concerted
marketing effort to shift consumers’ traditional purchasing decision criteria and transform those
buyers into a group with a preference for low carbon emission products and services. This study
indicates that the returns can be substantial if consumers who are currently not interested in purchasing
environmentally friendly products make even a little progress. Moreover, the results show that low
carbon emission operations cost more than the operations that do not consider carbon emissions.
178
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
However, when the CEBs are positive, an optimal degree of carbon reduction will maximize revenue.
Sadly, the unavoidable fact is that most consumers loathe paying to pay premium prices for low carbon
emission products. If enterprises are going to implement sustainable decisions, they must be certain
of CEBs.
7. Conclusions
This paper discussed the effects of consumer environmental behaviors (CEBs) on the design of
a sustainable supply chain. CEBs not only affect consumers’ willingness to pay premium prices for
low carbon emission products, but also the overall demand for low carbon emission products. We
introduced a sustainable supply chain network model based on the joint optimization of location,
routing and inventory, taking carbon emissions into consideration. The distinguishing feature
of our model is its consideration of the CEBs, which affect both carbon emission decisions and
product demand.
First, a multi-objective model is constructed, which provides a trade-off between costs and
carbon emissions. The MOPSO algorithm is used to solve the model, and then a Pareto optimal set
can be obtained. After that, we model the revenue function based on the Pareto solutions. In the
computational experiments, we test the model by the data from the Northeast Chemical Sales Company
of CNPC.We first obtain the Pareto optimal curve, which provides a portfolio of configurations for
decision makers. Then, we can use the same technique to obtain the revenue curves from different
carbon emissions. Hence, the unique optimal revenue levels and the relevant decisions can be acquired.
Finally, the sensitivity of the case study was analyzed. We are interested in the effects of CEBs on the
demand and revenue in a three-level supply chain. The results show that more positive CEBs result
in greater demand and higher revenue. We also observe that the pricing of low carbon operations is
critical. Therefore, enterprises should make marketing efforts to strengthen consumers’ environmental
preferences. Companies should support their claims to consumers and ensure the degree of CEBs
before implementing their carbon emission reduction policies.
Further research is required to determine more specific factors pertaining to CEBs in a supply
chain (e.g., the decision makers’ appetite for risk, the expectations of market development and the
effects of government intervention via carbon emission reduction policies and legislation), so that the
model will be more adaptive to real-life scenarios.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to express our sincere thanks to the anonymous referees and
editors for their time and patience devoted to the review of this paper. This work is supported by NSFC
Grant (No. 71572031).
Author Contributions: Jinhuan Tang proposed the model, write and revise the whole paper. Shoufeng Ji
contributes to join the research and give many valuable suggestions. Liwen Jiang is responsible for the solving
method, especially in the game theory, she made an enormous contribution.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Hufbauer, G.C.; Charnovitz, S.; Kim, J. Global Warming and the World Trading System; Peterson Institute for
International Economics: Washington, DC, USA, 2009.
2. Chistra, K. In search of the green consumers: A perceptual study. J. Serv. Res. 2007, 7, 173–191.
3. Conrad, K. Price competition and product differentiation when consumers care for the environment.
Environ. Resour. Econ. 2005, 31, 1–19. [CrossRef]
4. Laroche, M.; Bergeron, J.; Barbaro-Forleo, G. Targeting consumers who are willing to pay more for
environmentally friendly products. J. Consum. Market. 2001, 18, 503–520. [CrossRef]
5. Moon, W.; Florkowski, W.J.; Brückner, B.; Schonhof, I. Willing to pay for environmental practices:
Implications for eco-labeling. Land Econ. 2002, 78, 88–102. [CrossRef]
6. Ghosh, D.; Shah, J. A comparative analysis of greening policies across supply chain structures. Int. J.
Prod. Econ. 2012, 135, 568–583. [CrossRef]
179
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
7. Gil-Moltó, M.J.; Varvarigos, D. Emission taxes and the adoption of cleaner technologies: The case of
environmentally conscious consumers. Resour. Energy Econ. 2013, 35, 486–504. [CrossRef]
8. Liu, Z.L.; Anderson, T.D.; Cruz, J.M. Consumer environmental awareness and competition in two-stage
supply chains. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2012, 218, 602–613. [CrossRef]
9. Elhedhli, S.; Merrick, R. Green supply chain network design to reduce carbon emissions. Transp. Res. Part D
2012, 17, 370–379. [CrossRef]
10. Paksoy, T.; Özceylan, E.; Weber, G.W.; Barsoum, N.; Weber, G.W.; Vasant, P. A multi objective model for
optimization of a green supply chain network. Glob. J. Technol. Optim. 2011, 2, 84–96.
11. Paksoy, T.; Özceylan, E. Environmentally conscious optimization of supply chain networks. J. Oper. Res. Soc.
2013, 65, 855–872. [CrossRef]
12. Benjaafar, S.; Li, Y.; Daskin, M. Carbon footprint and the management of supply chains: Insights from simple
models. IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng. 2013, 10, 99–115. [CrossRef]
13. Kim, N.S.; Janic, M.; VanWee, B. Trade-off between carbon dioxide emissions and logistics costs based on
multiobjective optimization. Transp. Res. Rec. J. Transp. Res. Board 2009, 2139, 107–116. [CrossRef]
14. Wang, F.; Lai, X.F.; Shi, N. A multi-objective optimization for green supply chain network design.
Decis. Support Syst. 2011, 51, 262–269. [CrossRef]
15. Chaabane, A.; Ramudhin, A.; Paquet, M. Design of sustainable supply chains under the emission trading
scheme. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 2012, 135, 37–49. [CrossRef]
16. Chen, X.; Benjaafar, S.; Elomri, A. The carbon-constrained EOQ. Oper. Res. Lett. 2013, 41, 172–179. [CrossRef]
17. Babiker, M.H.; Criqui, P.; Ellerman, A.D.; Reilly, J.M.; Viguier, L.L. Assessing the impact of carbon tax
differentiation in the European Union. Environ. Model. Assess. 2003, 8, 187–197. [CrossRef]
18. Jabali, O.; Woensel, T.V.; de Kok, A.G. Analysis of Travel Times and CO2 Emissions in Time-Dependent
Vehicle Routing. Prod. Oper. Manag. 2012, 21, 1060–1074. [CrossRef]
19. Nagy, G.; Salhi, S. Location-routing: Issues, models and methods. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2007, 177, 649–672.
[CrossRef]
20. Dror, M.; Ball, M. Inventory/routing: Reduction from an annual to a short-period problem. Naval Res.
Logist. (NRL) 1987, 34, 891–905. [CrossRef]
21. Shen, Z.J.M.; Coullard, C.; Daskin, M.S. A joint location-inventory model. Transp. Sci. 2003, 37, 40–55.
[CrossRef]
22. AhmadiJavid, A.; Azad, N. Incorporating location, routing and inventory decisions in supply chain network
design. Transp. Res. Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 2010, 46, 582–597. [CrossRef]
23. Ahmadi-Javid, A.; Seddighi, A.H. A location-routing-inventory model for designing multisource distribution
networks. Eng. Optim. 2012, 44, 637–656. [CrossRef]
24. Hua, G.W.; Cheng, T.C.E.;Wang, S.Y. Managing carbon footprints in inventory management. Int. J. Prod. Econ.
2011, 132, 178–185. [CrossRef]
25. Kroes, J.; Subramanian, R.; Subramanyam, R. Operational compliance levers, environmental performance,
and firm performance under cap and trade regulation. Manuf. Serv. Oper. Manag. 2012, 14, 186–201.
[CrossRef]
26. Diabat, A.; David, S. A Carbon-Capped Supply Chain Network Problem. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management, Hong Kong, China, 8–11
December 2009; IEEE press: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2010; pp. 523–527.
27. Wygonik, E.; GooDChild, A. Evaluating CO2 emissions, cost and service quality trade-offs in an urban
delivery system case study. IATSS Res. 2011, 35, 7–15. [CrossRef]
28. Thøgersen, J. Promoting Green Consumer Behavior with Eco-Labels. In New Tools for Environmental Protection:
Education, Information, and Voluntary Measures; Dietz, T., Stern, P., Eds.; National Academy Press: Washington,
DC, USA, 2002; pp. 83–104.
29. Young, W.; Hwang, K.; McDonald, S.; Oates, C.J. Sustainable consumption: Green consumer behaviour
when purchasing products. Sustain. Dev. 2010, 18, 20–31. [CrossRef]
30. Vanclay, J.K.; Shortiss, J.; Aulsebrook, A.; Gillespie, A.M.; Howell, B.C.; Johanni, R.; Maher, M.J.; Mitchell, K.M.
Customer response to carbon labeling of groceries. J. Consum. Policy 2011, 34, 153–160. [CrossRef]
31. Tang, C.S.; Zhou, S. Research advances in environmentally and socially sustainable operations. Eur. J.
Oper. Res. 2012, 223, 585–594. [CrossRef]
180
Sustainability 2016, 8, 211
32. Desrochers, M.; Laporte, G. Improvements and extensions to the Miller-Tucker-Zemlin subtour elimination
constraints. Oper. Res. Lett. 1991, 10, 27–36. [CrossRef]
33. Kennedy, J.; Eberhart, R. Particle swarm optimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Neural Networks, Perth, Australia, 27 November–1 December 1995; pp. 1942–1948.
34. Shankar, B.L.; Basavarajappa, S.; Chen, J.C.; Kadadevaramath, R.S. Location and allocation decisions for
multi-echelon supply chain network–a multi-objective evolutionary approach. Expert Syst. Appl. 2013, 40,
551–562. [CrossRef]
35. Everson, R.M.; Fieldsend, J.E.; Singh, S. Full Elite Sets for Multi-Objective Optimisation. In Adaptive
Computing in Design and Manufacture V; Springer: London, UK, 2002; pp. 343–354.
36. Ling, H.F.; Zhou, X.Z.; Jiang, X.L.; Xiao, Y.H. Improved constrained multi-objective particle optimization
algorithm. J. Comput. Appl. 2012, 32, 1320–1324.
© 2016 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
181
sustainability
Article
Scalability of Sustainable Business Models in
Hybrid Organizations
Adam Jabło ´ nski
The Department of Management, the University of Da˛browa Górnicza (Wyz˙ sza Szkoła Biznesu w Da˛browie
Górniczej), Zygmunta Cieplaka Str. 1c, Da˛browa Górnicza 41-300, Poland; adam.jablonski@ottima-plus.com.pl;
Tel.: +48-32-262-2805
Academic Editor: Giuseppe Ioppolo
Received: 21 October 2015; Accepted: 17 February 2016; Published: 23 February 2016
Abstract: The dynamics of change in modern business create new mechanisms for company
management to determine their pursuit and the achievement of their high performance.
This performance maintained over a long period of time becomes a source of ensuring business
continuity by companies. An ontological being enabling the adoption of such assumptions is such
a business model that has the ability to generate results in every possible market situation and,
moreover, it has the features of permanent adaptability. A feature that describes the adaptability of
the business model is its scalability. Being a factor ensuring more work and more efficient work with
an increasing number of components, scalability can be applied to the concept of business models as
the company’s ability to maintain similar or higher performance through it. Ensuring the company’s
performance in the long term helps to build the so-called sustainable business model that often
balances the objectives of stakeholders and shareholders, and that is created by the implemented
principles of value-based management and corporate social responsibility. This perception of business
paves the way for building hybrid organizations that integrate business activities with pro-social
ones. The combination of an approach typical of hybrid organizations in designing and implementing
sustainable business models pursuant to the scalability criterion seems interesting from the cognitive
point of view. Today, hybrid organizations are great spaces for building effective and efficient
mechanisms for dialogue between business and society. This requires the appropriate business model.
The purpose of the paper is to present the conceptualization and operationalization of scalability of
sustainable business models that determine the performance of a hybrid organization in the network
environment. The paper presents the original concept of applying scalability in sustainable business
models with detailed interpretation. The paper and its findings are based on longitudinal research
with participant observation, bibliographic research and the author’s own experience in the processes
of building and implementing business models in the years 2005–2015. At the time, the author
observed the conceptualization and operationalization of several business models of companies
operating in the Polish market.
Keywords: scalability; sustainability; business models; hybrid organisations; network environment
1. Introduction
The dynamics of change in modern business create new mechanisms for company management to
determine their pursuit and achievement of their high performance. This performance maintained over
a long period of time becomes a source of ensuring business continuity by companies. An ontological
being enabling the adoption of such assumptions is such a business model that has the ability to
generate results in every possible market situation and, moreover, it has the features of permanent
adaptability. A feature that describes the adaptability of the business model is its scalability. Being
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194; doi:10.3390/su8030194 182 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
a factor ensuring more work and more efficient work with an increasing number of components,
scalability can be applied to the concept of business models as the company’s ability to maintain
similar or higher efficiency through it. Ensuring the company’s performance in the long term helps
to build the so-called sustainable business model that often balances the objectives of stakeholders
and shareholders, and that is created by the implemented principles of value-based management
and corporate social responsibility. This perception of business paves the way for building hybrid
organizations that integrate business activities with pro-social ones. The combination of an approach
typical of hybrid organizations in designing and implementing sustainable business models pursuant
to the scalability criterion seems interesting from the cognitive point of view. Today, hybrid
organizations are great spaces for building effective and efficient mechanisms for dialogue between
business and society. This requires the appropriate business model. The purpose of the paper is to
present the conceptualization and operationalization of scalability of sustainable business models that
determine the performance of a hybrid organization in the network environment. The paper presents
the original concept of applying scalability in sustainable business models with detailed interpretation.
2. The Methodology of Research
The research phases focus on the following issues:
(a) the review of the relevant literature and its analysis covering domestic and foreign references as
well as Internet sources,
(b) the practical analysis of research and its multidimensional synthesis aimed at scientific inference,
including preliminary research and the main research,
(c) the development of a six-phase research model,
(d) the implementation of the analysis and inference process, completed with the development of
a holistic sustainable business model in building the long-term value of a socially responsible
company with a reduced character, possible for use in the further development of the theory of
management science and applicable in the practice of modern business by company managers.
They are used to answer the following questions: Which strategic factors and their relationships
in the adopted business models have the greatest impact on building the long-term value of a socially
responsible company? What should the structure of such a business model be?
Research is expected to result in a sustainable business model becoming a source of building the
long-term value of a socially responsible company.
In order to achieve the objective of the book and the defined objectives of the research, different
research methods have been used after in-depth analysis, including both analysis and synthesis of
primary and secondary data, including:
(1) Longitudinal research with participant observation conducted in the period of 2005 to 2015, when
the author observed, in a continuous system, several business models of companies operating in
the Polish market. These companies represented various sectors of the economy. However, it
was important that these companies had a formal or semi-formal business model that could be
assessed and verified.
(2) Bibliographic research—the literature studies on the evaluation of management in theory
and practice: the concept of Network Environment, the concept of CSR (Corporate Social
Responsibility), the concept of Value-Based Management, the concept of Shareholders and
the concept of Stakeholders, the concept of Business Models, and the concept of Business
Sustainability and Business Scalability.
(3) The experience of the author resulting from his long managerial, research and teaching work in
the area of management theory and practice.
(4) Extended interviews revealing the specific character of the functioning of companies in today’s
market economy.
183
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
According to J.R. Kimberly [1] (p. 329), longitudinal organizational research consists of
those techniques, methodologies, and activities which permit the observation, description, and/or
classification of organizational phenomena in such a way that processes can be identified and
empirically documented. Longitudinal research essentially investigates processes across multiple
time periods. Since the time duration between data collection efforts is defined by the researcher and
by the unit under investigation, the length of a longitudinal study and number of data collection
periods vary across designs. Longitudinal designs vary along six parameters: length of study; duration
between data collection efforts; number of data collection periods; method of data collection; research
objectives; and unit of analysis [2]. Janson (1981) suggests two broad classes of longitudinal research,
(1) correlative longitudinal research (including studies of both normal representative populations
and non-representative populations); and (2) experimental manipulative research [3]. Longitudinal
research is associated with the implementation of repeatable measurements of the same individuals
or population over a long time, meaning a period of time that enables the detection of changes.
Longitudinal research is often called prospective research. In longitudinal research, the author studied
the cause and effect relationships occurring in the conceptualization and operationalization of the
observed business models. The cause and effect relationships were mainly related to the attributes
(components) of business models of the surveyed companies. The author studied and identified
events important to the development of the processes of change and the development of company
business models and their attributes to understand and explain the processes of business model
configuration changes. The reflections contained in the paper are based, among others, on the author’s
own observations of the actual business models in business practice. They can therefore be used as a
benchmark for the management mechanisms used by managers in the design and operationalization
of sustainable business models of companies.
Bibliographic research involved a multidimensional review of the literature. Conducting
bibliographic research, the author followed the assumptions defined by Z. Jourdan, R. Kelly Rainer,
and T.E. Marshall [4].
The structure of bibliographic review and the framework of theoretical development followed the
assumptions of M. Massaro, J. Dumay, J. Guthrie and included the following steps:
(1) Writing a literature review protocol.
(2) Defining the questions that the literature review is setting out to answer.
(3) Determining the type of studies and carrying out a comprehensive literature search.
(4) Measuring article impact.
(5) Defining an analytical framework.
(6) Establishing literature review reliability.
(7) Testing literature review validity.
(8) Coding data using the developed framework.
(9) Developing insights and critique through analyzing the dataset.
(10) Developing future research paths and questions [5].
The above methodological assumptions were necessary to effectively present the scientific
argument of the author.
The assumptions of the literature review included, inter alia, defining actual economic mechanisms
occurring in the macroeconomic, sectoral and microeconomic dimensions.
Due to this fact, this issue addressed according to the adopted methodology is particularly
important in terms of the following assumptions describing actual economic mechanisms occurring in
the macroeconomic, sectoral and microeconomic dimensions. Furthermore, an important factor in the
development of this issue is the fact that two parallel streams of building sustainable business models
develop. One concerns the creation of entities developing according to the sustainability business trend
and the other one concerns the trend of building social organizations including non-profit entities.
184
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
In this context, economic entities aiming to make a profit try to balance their goals, processes
and actions to maintain dynamic, strategic balance with reasonable profit and the other entities
are determined to offer social services that follow the sustainability business principles. From this
perspective, the following macroeconomic, sector and microeconomic assumptions determine the
current dimension of the business.
Macroeconomic assumptions [6]:
In the situation of the global economic crisis and increased public awareness of the quality of life,
professed values have changed significantly
Social inequality in the world results in waves of discontent and conflict.
(1) Access to knowledge, information and goods is very easy. The only limitation is money.
(2) Free movement of goods and services enables the migration of people in search of a better quality
of life. This results in the intercultural and ideological exchange of the population.
(3) The aging of European society and the stronger role of Asian countries are changing views on
the functions of companies in the economy.
(4) The global ecosystem of the world has a significant impact on the economic sub-systems of
individual continents, regions and countries.
(5) The current world is the world of communication via the Internet and a network society.
(6) Civilization changes are creating new needs and conditions of business
(7) The network environment is a key business environment.
(8) Virtualization determines the development of contemporary business.
(9) Market mechanisms are global and unpredictable.
(10) Access to information, knowledge and many resources is simple and universal.
Sector assumptions [7–10]:
(1) The place and role of sectors and sectoral conditions in the economy are dramatically changing.
(2) In many cases, sectors are blurred and fragmented; they overlap, merge or are eliminated.
(3) Socially unacceptable economic sectors are supplanted by high technology sectors, and industrial
sectors are turned into service sectors.
(4) Regions compete with each other and their value is built for society. As a consequence, local
decision-making systems create a need for the emergence of new economy sectors.
(5) Classic sector analyses do not fulfill their role, because the life cycles of sectors become shorter
and also because of the dynamics and unpredictability of the expectations that society has.
Microeconomic assumptions [11–19]:
(1) Currently, a company is not perceived only as a financial instrument, but as a source of social
capital as well.
(2) A company becomes a tool for redistribution of value for its stakeholders.
(3) Autocratic management methods based on bloodthirsty maximization of value for shareholders
are not accepted in many cases, both in companies and in society.
(4) A company plays an educational, cultural and economic role for the whole society.
(5) A company becomes a factor in population migration towards prosperity and better quality
of life.
(6) A company becomes a source of permanent innovation. Without innovative products, processes
and management methods, companies are not able to survive in the market.
(7) Mechanisms based on the symbiosis of many conflicting interest groups and their synergies
towards ensuring business continuity determine the new areas of decision-making systems.
(8) Due to the uncertainty of the company towards individuals, mechanisms based on a system
approach to management are playing a stronger role. Only tight management systems can
185
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
protect companies against risks caused by the company stakeholders (including hostile ones), as
well as those caused by the unpredictability, asymmetry and arrhythmia of the external market.
(9) A company is now seen as the sum of its contracts over time [20–23]
(10) A company is a tool for value migration through network structures.
(11) A company is a place of intellectual and social capital development.
(12) A company is increasingly perceived and built by virtual dimensions.
(13) A company is a platform for developing many dimensions of ideas and innovation.
(14) The company’s business model is determined by the network.
These assumptions can provide a platform for multidimensional scientific discussion about the
search for the best possible solution for building effective business models. In the author’s opinion, this
solution may include seeking the scalability of sustainable business models in hybrid organizations.
Based on the above reflections, a research gap related to the lack of the sufficient amount of
research on the scalability of sustainable business models of hybrid organizations in a network
environment is noted.
A scientific problem has been presented, which says: Business model scalability affects the
sustainability of the business model of hybrid organizations. The research problem is significant
as there is currently very little research on business model scalability, particularly in a network
environment. Simultaneously, the dynamically developing concept of sustainable business models
is used for hybrid organizations. The interconnection of these two important subjects seems to be
scientifically important and cognitively interesting.
In order to solve the scientific problem, the following hypotheses have been formulated:
Hypothesis 1. Scalability and sustainability are key determinants of building a business model of
hybrid organizations embedded in a network environment.
Hypothesis 2. The network environment is favorable to building sustainable business models that
are highly scalable.
Hypothesis 3. In order for a business model of the hybrid organizations to be sustainable, first of all
it must be scalable.
The author proves the hypotheses based on the described research.
3. Network Environment
Changes in the world economy lead to new paradigms of management that create a new
dimension of competing, creating value and achieving results. Currently, one of the key management
paradigms changing the image of management science is the network paradigm, within which the
network is the key element around which management takes place. The network may have many
interpretations, which make the effective application of this paradigm in business practice complicated.
Therefore, it is important to thoroughly understand the mechanisms applicable to a network approach.
According to M. Gorynia, the sources and origin of a network approach are related to the following
research prospects:
´ marketing, and in particular the relationship between the participants in the distribution channels
(Hakanson, 1982) [24].
´ a resource dependence model in analyzing the relationships between organizations (Pfeffer,
Salancik, 1978) [25].
´ the social exchange theory (Cook, Emerson, 1984) [26].
´ the theory of industrial organization (Porter, 1980) [27].
´ the new trend in institutional economics with the transaction costs theory (Williamson, 1975) [28].
It is worth highlighting the evolution of interest in the network approach in management science.
In recent years, in management, as in many other disciplines, the amount of research on social networks
186
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
has dramatically increased. The amount of literature about networks has risen exponentially, as shown
in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Exponential development of publications indexed by sociological abstracts containing the
phrase “social network” in the abstract or title [29].
The rapid growth in research on networks in management results in a need for analysis and
classification of what has been done in this area. It should be noted that since the 1990s, the network
theory has been referred to in the literature in virtually all traditional areas of management such
as: leadership, sales, satisfaction, work performance, entrepreneurship, relationships, knowledge,
innovation, profit maximization, horizontal integration and many others [29]. H. Hakanson and I
Snehota define a network as three interrelated categories: participants in the network, the resources
that they have at their disposal and the actions taken [30]. C. Martin Rios defines inter-firm networks
as voluntary agreements of independent companies that involve knowledge exchange and sharing [31].
J.C. Jarillo understands that a network is a grouping of organizations in which at least one controls
the flow of tangible and intangible assets (including knowledge) between other organizations [32].
The principal value of the network is its ability to create tacit knowledge, a company-integrator and
diffusion to cooperants at the first, second and nth level [33]. Network categorization by G.J. Hooley,
J.A. Saunders, N. F. Piercy distinguishes the following network types: hollow networks, flexible
networks, virtual networks and value-added networks [34].
R. Achrol divides networks into the internal networks markets, opportunity networks, marketing
channel networks and intermarket networks [35].
On the basis of broad, multidimensional bibliographic research on networks and the network
environment, the author has defined network attributes found in the relevant literature that can be
used for the conceptualization and operationalization of a scalable business model operating in a
networked environment (Table 1).
187
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
Table 1. Network attributes defined in the literature used for the conceptualization and
operationalization of a scalable business model developed based on [7,26–32,36–60].
No. Network Attributes Definition
1. Network size The number of network members.
2. Network diameter The length of the longest of all the shortest paths connecting
pairs of network elements.
3. Network density The ratio of links between network nodes to the maximum
number of links between those nodes [36].
4. Network concentration The ratio of network nodes in the center of the network to
those that are on the periphery.
5. Number of networks The number of network nodes.
6. Heterogeneity The extent of nodes heterogeneity.
7. Network diversity The number of various categories of entities participating in
the network.
8. Dynamics of
network interaction
The number of initiatives in a year implemented by network
members to the benefit of the network.
9. Network members turnover The number of transactions of network entries and exits.
10. Network coordination costs Total costs incurred by the network coordinator in a year to
support the network.
11. Potential for conflict in
the network
The number of conflicts between network members related to
activity in the network.
12. Competition in the network The number of network participants who are competitors.
13. The average length of paths The average number of connections of any two entities in
the network.
14. Connection measure
The proportion of the pairs of nodes interconnected by
relationships with those that have no connections in
the network.
15. The proximity of centrality
Centrality can be regarded as generating expected values for
certain kinds of node outcomes (such as speed and frequency
of reception) of given implicit models of how traffic flows in
the network, which provides a new and useful way of
thinking about centrality Centrality as defined by the measure
of proximity (the average distance of a unit from other nodes)
or transitivity (the frequency of the occurrence on the shortest
path of relationships between any two nodes in the network,
assuming that information/phenomenon is transmitted on the
shortest path).
16. The proximity of centrality The distance of a network member (a node) from the
headquarters of the cluster coordinator (the main node).
17. Coherence
Percentage share of units included in the so-called great
component (interconnected with a direct or indirect
relationship) in relation to all network nodes.
18. Network complexity
The number of different entities that have to establish
inter-organizational relationships so that a network
organization could develop.
19. Network potential
The number and type of entities that may be involved or
participate in the network activities including resources (also
competencies) that are at the disposal of these entities that
may potentially be useful in performing network tasks and
achieving the set objective.
20.
The formal structure of the
network (the formalization
of relationships)
The area of formalizing the relationship between the entities
forming the network, network complexity and degree of
its centralization.
188
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
Table 1. Cont.
No. Network Attributes Definition
21. The intensity of
the relationship
The number of interactions between network members at a
given time.
22. Trust in the network
The mechanism based on the assumption that the other
community members are characterized by honest and
cooperative behavior on the basis of shared standards, which
is significant and measurable economic value.
23. The micro-position of a
network node
The micro-position reflects the potential of the node related to
forming the relationships with other network nodes,
compared to the nodes that cannot form such relationships or
do it inefficiently [61].
24. The macro-position of a
network node
The macro-position reflects the role of a node across the
network, dependent on its ability to shape the relationship
between resources and activities of nodes within the network.
This results partly from the activities taking place inside the
node, and partly from what the node achieves from the
activities of other network nodes [61].
25. Bargaining power of a
network node
The ability of a node to use and convert rare and valuable
environmental resources [62].
26. Network capability
Network capability is a set of processes and routine
organizational behavior aimed at taking advantage of
opportunities related to embedding the company in the
inter-organizational network [63].
4. Business Models
The concept of business models is now one of the most explored subjects in the theory and practice
of management. This is evidenced, for example, by the number of publications with the term “business
model” in the EBSCO (Elton B. Stephens Company) database between 1975 and 2009, as shown in
Figure 2.
Figure 2. Number of publications with the term “business model” in the EBSCO database between
1975 and 2009 [64].
This also leads to a multitude of definitions of business models and various
multidimensional approaches.
B.W. Wirtz presents the stages of the development of approaches to business models over the
years 1950–2010+ (Figure 3).
189
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
Figure 3. Stages of the development of approaches to business models [65].
The above figure shows that, currently, an integrated approach to business model management
prevails. This gives rise to the need to review the business model from multiple perspectives.
In order to effectively express the concept of the business model, the author quotes the definition
by D. Teece, who says that “a business model determines the way in which a company creates and
delivers value to customers, and then converts the payments received into profits” [66]. In addition,
based on extensive bibliographic research, a synthetic review of the literature on the concept of business
models from different perspectives has been presented below.
The business model approach understood as a type of a market player in the value chain
is highlighted, for example, by K. Obłój [67] (operator, integrator, conductor), T. Goł˛ebiowski,
T. M. Dudzik, M. Lewandowska and M.Witek-Hajduk [68] (traditionalist, market player, contractorspecialist,
distributor, integrator). The approach to the e-business model from the perspective of the
player market is presented, for example, by P. Timmers (e-shop, e-procurement, e-mall, e-auction,
value chain service providers, virtual business community, cooperation platform) [69], Rappa [70]
(advertising, brokerage, community, infomediary, manufacturer, merchant, subscription, utility) and
Applegate [71] (focused distributor models-retailer, marketplace, aggregator, infomediary, exchange,
portal models–horizontal portals, vertical portals, affinity portals, producer models-manufacturer,
service provider, educator, advisor, information and news services, custom supplier and infrastructure
provider models with a number of sub-models, e.g., infrastructure portals.
A business model understood through the prism of the company’s profitability has been presented
by, among others, by A. Slywotzky. Together with his team he described 22 profitable business models
based on the experiences of American companies [72].
The link between the business model and strategy and business processes is highlighted by
A. Osterwalder, Y. Pigneur [73] and L. Bossidy, R. Charan [74] and J. Niemczyk [75]. In terms of value
creation, the definition of the business model is presented by, among others, P.B. Seddon, G.P. Lewis,
P. Freeman, G. Shanks [76], B. de Witt, R. Meyer [77]. The following authors focus on studying the
business model from the perspective of stakeholders: F. Hoque [78] and S. Voelpel, M. Leibold, E. Tekie,
G. von Krogh (2005) [22] and A. Jabło ´ nski [79]. The definitions of networked business models are
presented, inter alia, by K. Perechuda [33] A. Jabło ´ nski, M. Jabło ´ nski [80]. The link between the business
model and resource-based view is highlighted by K. Krzakiewicz and S. Cyfert [81]. The business
model ensuring the stability and continuity of the company is presented, among others, by B. Demil, X.
190
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
Lecocq [82], K.D. Sandberg [83], A. Afuah, C. Tucci [84]. B. Nogalski [85] defines a business model
from the development perspective. A hybrid business model is presented by S.J. Deodhar, K. Saxena,
R.K. Gupta, M. Ruohonen [86], and A. Jabło ´ nski [87]. The definition of a sustainable business model is
presented, among others, by W. Stubbs and C. Cocklin [88] and F. Boons, F. Lüdeke-Freund [89] and A.
Jabło ´ nski [90], while A. Neely, R. Delbridge [91] focus on a geometric business model.
The above approaches describe the particular complexity of the concept of business models in
management science. The bibliographic research indicates a multidimensional look at the business
model and creates further implications for research.
5. Sustainable Business Models
If we assume that the company’s business model is based on the principles of balancing the
business from a number of perspectives, it will become a sustainable business model. This definition
is also consistent with the assumptions relevant to a sustainable company. The sustainable business
model can be better understood by understanding:
- the role of different sustainability drivers,
- causal relationships in relation to the various actions to be taken,
- the impact of these actions on sustainable results,
- the potential and actual impact on the financial results [92].
T. Dyllick and K. Hockerts present a model based on the concept of corporate sustainability
(balancing and integrating the activities of the company) mapped in the form of a triangle. In three
corners of the triangle there are: focus on business case, natural case and societal case [93].
W. McDonough and M. Braungart present the model of corporate sustainability in the form of a
fractal triangle, whose corners include: ecology–ecology, equity–equity and economy–economy [94].
An interesting sustainable business model based on the original concept of SMART (sustainability
modeling and reporting system) has been developed by M. Daud Ahmed and D. Sundaram [95]. In this
model they define the sustainable business transformation roadmap, where its key elements include:
- design,
- transformation,
- monitoring and control,
- discovery and learning,
- strategy.
M. Yunus, B. Moingeon, L. Lehmann-Ortega [96] define the concept of a social business model,
which can be a sustainable business model. They have developed five principles of building a social
business model consisting of two areas:
(1) Framework common also for innovative models.
(2) Areas specific to social models.
The similarities with conventional and innovative business models include:
(1) The challenges of conventional wisdom and fundamental assumptions.
(2) The discovery of complementary business partners.
(3) Undertakings in improving process experiments.
Specific objectives for social business models include:
(1) Creating favorable conditions for social orientation in terms of profit by the shareholders.
(2) Clear, specific objectives for profit for society.
191
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
The social business model is adopted by the social company. P. Kotler, H. Kartajaya and I. Setiawan
define three measures of the success of a social company that will indicate whether the company will
be able to strengthen the economic foundations of society. Using these measures, it is easy to say
which company is a social company and which is not. First of all, such a company attains disposable
income. Secondly, it extends this income. Thirdly, it increases it [97] (p. 136). B. Nogalski notes that in
order to implement a new model (and, therefore, change), harmony between organizational structures,
support systems, processes, workforce skills, resources and the incentive system, and the time horizon
is necessary. All these elements and supporting processes (including corporate culture that should also
be adapted to the business model) should support the implementation of changes in the model and
the strategy in a consistent manner [98] (p. 123). Harmony and match are the factors conducive to the
application of the principles of sustainability.
An interesting approach to the business model based on sustainability has been introduced by
A. Osterwalder and Y. Pigneur [99] (p. 62), who have presented the concept of innovative business
models of responsible companies in the form of a coordinate system. They determine the relationship
between corporations and non-profit organizations, believing that corporations in their business
models should move towards the development of social potential and its impact on business (currently
the undervalued area in corporation management). In contrast, non-profit organizations should
develop their business models towards seeking greater profit potential (currently the undervalued
area in non-profit organizations management).
F. Boons and F. Lüdeke-Freund present sustainable business models that enable social
entrepreneurs to create social value and maximize social profit; of significance is the business models’
ability to act as market device that helps in creating and further developing markets for innovations
with a social purpose [89] (p. 20). S. Schaltegger, F. Lüdeke-Freund, and E. Hansen present that based
on the understanding of a business case for sustainability, a business model for sustainability can be
defined as supporting voluntary or mainly voluntary activities which solve or moderate social and/or
environmental problems. By doing so, it creates positive business effects which can be measured or at
least argued for. A business model for sustainability is actively managed in order to create customer
and social value by integrating social, environmental, and business activities [100].
Looking at the business model from the point of view of fulfilling the needs and requirements of
stakeholders as a source of competitive advantage in the market, a key factor in building an effective
strategy might be:
(1) Treating the organization as a system which determines the adoption of an appropriate
management philosophy, an optimal organizational structure, and an appropriate shape of
intra-process relationships.
(2) Building the appropriate structure of dynamic marketing focused on the business partnership
with stakeholder groups in a balance of forces between stakeholders’ impact on the company
and vice versa.
(3) Focus on internal and external communication for the collectivization of joint activities in an
in-out-in system, inside the organization–outside the organization–inside the organization.
(4) The resource-based approach, taking into account all members of the organization to achieve key
objectives of the company.
The adoption of such a shape of the model of the defined strategy line can make it possible to
answer the following questions strategically for the company:
(1) Who is responsible for the interpretation and the formation of objectives?
(2) Which stakeholders do we have a relationship with?
(3) How do services and innovative processes proceed?
(4) What are the incentives and the structure of the incentive system to stakeholders?
(5) What rights and responsibilities do we have towards the company?
192
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
(6) What are the decision-making processes between the company and supervisory authorities?
(7) How recognizable is the company brand?
(8) How have company resources been defined qualitatively and quantitatively in the processes [101]
(pp. 35–36)?
These questions also shift the focus of the business model on both internal and external factors,
where trust is an important factor.
In this case, trust can be based on values, motivation and structures, which indicates how highly
the values, motivation and structures that help to achieve the strategic objectives of the organization
are valued. Furthermore, in this context, the following are important: clarity, fairness and stability of
the procedures used [102] (p. 109). Building the model using the concept of Sustainable Enterprises
requires the company to integrate the key strategic factors constituting the business model towards
sustainability in the economic, environmental and social area:
- economic sustainability—it requires an increase in the profitability of the company through the
efficient use of resources (human, raw materials, finance), effective projects and undertakings,
good management, planning and control,
- ecological sustainability—it is essential that harmful and irreversible consequences for the
environment are prevented through the efficient use of natural resources, promoting renewable
resources, soil and water protection, and skillful waste management,
- social sustainability—requires the response to the needs of society including all other
stakeholders [103] (p. 277).
In summary, the sustainable business model building the long-term value of a socially responsible
company is a model built by the combined use of the corporate social responsibility and value-based
management concepts which guarantees that the needs of shareholders and other stakeholder groups
are fulfilled, by balancing the company potential skillfully to generate value allocated in a sustainable
way, allowing the continuity of company management. The sustainable business model is a hybrid
model, i.e., a model built in a subject- object system. Components of this model are entities gathered
around business-forming relationships, influencing the company value drivers and strategic factors
related to the theory of corporate social responsibility, company value–based management, the
stakeholder theory, and the shareholder theory, which are in a mutual relationship based on the
principles of sustainability. This model is a holistic model of reduced nature, which could be applied
in various sectors of the economy that are treated as a subsystem of the whole ecosystem. This means
that the model and its construction are included in mid-range theory [90] (pp. 400–403).
6. Hybrid Organizations
The functioning of contemporary companies often requires them to use a dual perspective
in defining their strategic goals. They should be cost-effective and, at the same time, open
to social purposes. Then they can take advantage of the potential inherent in the network of
company stakeholders.
A company where the ability to generate value for shareholders and the widely understood
business community is ensured is called a hybrid company.
This approach determines the rules for providing the context for scientific discussion. This context
providing a framework for discussion relates to presenting the picture of reality determining the
conduct of business today. A company which currently performs many economic and social functions
is searching for a new strategic reference.
This strategic reference becomes more complex and complicated. The market of customers that
are often prosumers co-developing an offer with the company creates changes in cooperation and
co-development. It all has a hybrid dimension. The hybrid dimension refers to the place and role of the
company and its functions and combining objectives and activities as well as the cooperation between
the ontological beings of the company such as strategy, a business model and business processes.
193
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
In general terms, a hybrid is a combination of different elements in a coherent whole. Creating
hybrids involves combining two or more different approaches (methodologies) to form a new single
approach (methodology).
A heterosis effect (called hybridization in the case of deliberate procedures) is a hybrid showing
longer life and increased fertility. The individual elements in a hybrid can work together, and they can
also compete with each other. The motivation for creating hybrid systems can be a conviction that there
is a positive synergistic effect of their use. Hybridity may consist of the pragmatic and coordinated
(parallel, serial, hierarchical and virtual) cooperation of many factors with each other, consequently,
however, forming a coherent whole which is the combination of elements derived from other systems.
As regards inorganic systems, in a hybrid-artifact (a computer program, method) showing increased
usability, the quality of solutions, etc., will be evaluated positively. A. Ultsch uses the term “hybrid” in
the context of hermaphrodite forms created through a merger or crossing [104]. The hybrid model in
physics is the model that couples two or more devices that are used for shaping physical processes in
various ways, for example analog-digital devices are used here. The hybrid system is a drive system
where two different energy sources or generally different power sources co-work. A hybrid scheme in
electronics is used to describe the parameters of electronic circuits. A hybrid drive is a combination of
two types of drives to move a single device. A hybrid vehicle is a vehicle that has at least (usually) an
engine with two drives. Three basic types of hybrid can be distinguished in terms of action: parallel,
serial and mixed action.
A hybrid approach in business can combine numerous divisions according to selected criteria for
classification, in particular the following [105] (p. 4):
(1) By the extremes: for profit–non-profit [106,107].
(2) By the social sector of: the market–civil society–state [108–110].
(3) By the type of integration: external–integrated–built-in [111,112].
(4) By the goods produced: private–public [113–115].
(5) By the product status: goods–services [116].
(6) By the agents of value creation: manufacturers–consumers [117–119].
(7) By ownership (corporate governance): private–cooperative–public [105,107,110].
Hybrids offer alternative solutions, probably the optimal ones, when significant limitations in
obtaining contractors occur [120] (p. 19).
Hybrid organizations can exist on either side of the for profit/non-profit divide, blurring this
boundary by adopting social and environmental missions like nonprofits, but generating income to
accomplish their mission like for-profits. Hybrids are built on the assertion that neither traditional
for-profit or non-profit models adequately address the social and environmental problems we currently
face. Entrepreneurs of hybrids seek to build viable organizations and markets to address specific
social and environmental issues.( . . . ) Hybrid organizations are underpinned by a new and growing
demographic of individuals who place a higher value on healthy living, environmental and social
justice, and ecological sustainability in the products and services they purchase, the companies in
which they invest, the politicians and policies they support, the companies for which they work
and, ultimately, the lifestyles they lead. This demographic is recognized with labels such as Cultural
Creatives and Lifestyles of Health and Sustainability (LOHAS) [121] (p. 126).
One of the key approaches to hybrids in terms of the common implementation of social and
economic goals has been proposed by F.M. Santos. He defines four important proposals related to
social entrepreneurship:
Proposition 1. The distinctive domain of action of social entrepreneurship is addressing neglected
problems in society involving positive externalities.
Proposition 2. Social entrepreneurs are more likely to operate in areas with localized positive
externalities that benefit a powerless segment of the population.
194
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
Proposition 3. Social entrepreneurs are more likely to seek sustainable solutions than to seek
sustainable advantages.
Proposition 4. Social entrepreneurs are more likely to develop a solution built on the logic of
empowerment than on the logic of control [122].
A strategic hybrid, according to A. Jabło ´ nski, is understood in strategic terms as a blend of the
business model, strategy and business processes used to achieve an acceptable level of company
performance in the short and long term. Due to its eclectic character, the strategic hybrid may lead
to achieving the set results more quickly. The relationships between the strategy, business model
and business processes may also determine the simultaneous development of a company in terms
of products, market and resources. Strategic hybrid consistency is the mutual and interdependent
compliance of all components of the business model, strategy and business processes with the specific
criteria that ensure the company’s ability to achieve high performance in the long and short term.
The result of hybridization is the so-called synergistic effect (a hybrid demonstrates the features
that are difficult to see in the original compositions). The hybrid creates new value based on the
non-standard configuration consisting of predefined components while maintaining its proper full
integrity. The adoption of such a solution is a decision made by prudent managers [87] (p. 46).
A.-C. Pache and F. Santos suggest, based on their own research, that hybrid organizations combine
the competing logics in which they are embedded through selective coupling [123]. In contrast to
decoupling, which entails the ceremonial espousal of a prescribed practice with no actual enactment,
selective coupling refers to the purposeful enactment of selected practices among a pool of competing
alternatives. Selective coupling allows hybrids to satisfy symbolic concerns, just as decoupling
does [123]. By plotting two dimensions in a matrix, A.C. Pache, F.M. Santos and C. Birkholz derive
a typology of four social business hybrid models that we call Market Hybrids, Blending Hybrids,
Bridging Hybrids, and Coupling Hybrids (Table 2) [124].
Table 2. A typology of social business hybrids [124] (p. 45).
Dimensions Clients = Beneficiaries Clients “
Beneficiaries
MARKET HYBRID
Examples: BOP initiatives for access
to basic services (energy, health)
BRIDGING HYBRID
Examples: integrated business model
with job-matching for people
with disabilities
Automatic Value Spillovers Risk of Mission Drift: Low
Financial Sustainability: Easy
Risk of Mission Drift:
Intermediate (lower risk for more
integrated models)
Financial Sustainability:
Moderately Difficult
Contingent Value Spillovers
BLENDING HYBRID
Examples: Microfinance, integration
models that require regular support or
change of behavior for value to
be created
Risk of Mission Drift:
Intermediate
Financial Sustainability:
Moderately Difficult
COUPLING HYBRID
Example: Work integration social
enterprises that require a dual value
chain that serves both clients
and beneficiaries
Risk of Mission Drift: High
Financial Sustainability:
Difficult
Vivek K. Velamuri, Anne-Katrin Neyer and Kathrin M. Möslein believe that a “Hybrid” in the
creation of hybrid value is the presence of two distinct types of components in the offer: (1) the
existence of the product (tangible component) and (2) the existence of the non-material service
(intangible component). They define the creation of hybrid value as a process of generating additional
value through the innovative integration of the product (tangible component) and service (intangible
component). Similarly, each business model that satisfies the above criteria (the creation of value and
hybridity) will be included in the process of hybrid value creation [125]. Such an approach to a hybrid
195
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
creates a new dimension to the implementation of key strategic objectives of the company. Being
receptive to many economic and social aspects and their interconnections generates new dynamics of
the company. This is the basis for building business models that are evolutionary in their nature and
based on the stability generating the continuity of business.
7. Scalability
Scalability aims to provide more work and more efficient work with an increasing number of
components. It is, among other things, a feature of computer networks consisting of the ability to
expand continuously. Scalability is sometimes defined as “the ease with which a system or component
can be modified depending on the type of problem”. A scalable system has three basic features:
- The system can adapt to its increased use.
- The system can accommodate larger amounts of data.
- The system is easy to maintain technically and works with reasonable efficiency.
Scalability is not only speed. Effectiveness and scalability of the system vary and correlate
with each other. Effectiveness measures how quickly and efficiently the system can perform certain
calculations, while scalability measures the trend of effectiveness with an increased load [126].
Daniel A. Menascé and Virgilio A.F. Almeida think that the system is scalable if there is a
“simple” way to update the system to enable support for increased trade while maintaining proper
efficiency. Simple means that no change in the system architecture or software should be required
to scale the system [127]. The Universal Scalability Law (USL) in computing is a model used for
forecasting the scalability of hardware and software. It uses the system performance as a function
of load to forecast system scalability. The USL function is used to create a model from the formula
and data frame. The USL model produces two coefficients as result: sigma models the contention
and kappa the coherency delay of the system. The Universal Scalability Law was formulated by
Neil J. Gunther [128,129].
Scalability is an essential element for studies in strategic management, yet is unrecognized fully
and sufficiently. The concept of scalability can thus be adapted now to the important debate on the
mechanisms of strategic management.
Business model scalability is the capacity of the business model to maintain similar or better
effectiveness while continuously increasing or reducing the number of its components and while
constantly adjusting the boundaries of its impact (e.g., in a network environment).
Scaling in the business model thus refers to, inter alia, adding or removing a component and/or
components of the business model in order to improve its effectiveness. Scalability is a key parameter
that determines the company’s ability to grow, and it is based on the contention that not every unit of
revenue is generated by an equal cost unit. Assessing the capability of business models to increase the
company’s value, investors first of all appreciate models that allow companies to have higher revenues
and create higher and higher profitability. However, a common feature of e-business models especially
is that they have high market value at low or even no profits in the long term. Market value is high
because of attributes, which are characteristic of business models such as an innovative solution in the
area of social networks, a unique technical solution forming interesting value added, etc. Therefore,
their scalability is important then.
In the literature, for example, Amit and Zott [130], Rappa [131], and Bouwman and MacInnes [132]
define scalability as a key factor of innovative business models contributing to the achievement of
results by the company. Scalability, therefore, is an important feature of the business model as it is
included in its configuration, whereas strategy sets a business model in motion and gives its resources
the right direction, in line with the expectations of business model decision-makers, and scalable
business processes are used to implement operational objectives and will be more effective when a
business model is highly scalable as well.
196
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
According to Christian Nielsen and Morten Lund, scalable business models have the
following characteristics:
- The business potential is characterized by exponentially increasing returns to scale
- They remove themselves from otherwise typical capacity constraints of that type of business
- Partners enrich the value proposition without hurting profits
- Stakeholders take multiple roles and create value for one another
- The business model becomes a platform that attracts new partners, including competitors [133]
(pp. 16–17).
Based on the literature review and interviews with entrepreneurs and investors, Georg Stampfl,
Reinhard Prügl and Vincent Osterloh identify the key factors in scaling the business model and some
consequences of scalability. Their discussions are illustrated by examples of well-known Internet
companies. Their findings show that the factors that affect the scalability of the business model include
technology, cost and earnings structure, institutional capacity for adaptation (i.e., the ability to adapt to
different legal standards), and network effects and user orientation [134] (pp. 219–220).
According to R. Green, a scalable business model is a simple concept. The model is scalable when
increased revenues cost less to deliver than current revenues. In other words, the operating margin
increases with increasing revenues [135].
The following are 10 tips to build the most scalable company:
(1) If investors are needed, start with a scalable idea.
(2) Create a business plan and model that is attractive to investors.
(3) Use a product with a minimum necessary functionality (MVP) to authenticate a model.
(4) Build a strong team to get out of the critical path.
(5) Subcontract what is not strategic to optimize financial leverage.
(6) Focus on indirect and marketing channels to quickly convey a message.
(7) Make the most of automation.
(8) Attract and use investment funds.
(9) Take into account the possibility of buying licenses and franchising.
(10) Define a business that is flexible and constantly improving [136].
E-commerce system scalability is one of the key factors in e-business. This is so because the trade
on e-commerce websites is periodic: there are high seasons, there are variations between days, and
campaigns and events can attract the attention of an unexpectedly large number of customers. The most
important part of scalability management is that the company is trying to avoid such technological
systems that have a predetermined maximum performance (new performance requires an entirely
different platform/technology/system structure). In this context, performance can be seen as:
- the number of the same users/connections that the system can handle without errors/problems;
- the number of transactions possible at the same time;
- the maximum data transfer (download, etc.).
Speaking of accessibility, we mean the time of the system operation from the point of view of
the customer. It is a concept closely related to scalability and contracts at the service level because
it is a measure of how good the access is that customers have to services in real time, i.e., starting a
call, receiving a response and returning to the transaction when it is possible. Technical measures to
ensure availability range from session control to transaction maintenance to databases supporting the
required operations [137] (p. 59).
Business model scalability can be applied to startup organizations.
According to S. Blank and B. Dorf, a startup is a temporary organization dedicated to looking for
a scalable, repeatable and profitable business model [138] (p. 19). Such a definition clearly indicates
startup characteristics such as:
197
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
(1) Temporality.
(2) Lack of durability.
(3) Volatility.
(4) Risk and uncertainty.
The proposed definition explicitly refers to the concept of a business model as a factor determining
the success or failure of the company. In startup organizations it is not a strategy that will determine
its success but a well-designed business model, based on credible premises. S. Blank highlights a new
approach to the design of startup organizations, believing that the startup founders should not begin
by developing a business plan, but searching for a business model [139] (p. 7).
Factors stimulating changes in the business model component arise from the implementation
of open innovation, which in many cases requires business model configuration changes for their
effective implementation. In this case, the level of business model scalability will also depend on
the level of company innovation in the context of open innovation (arising from relationships with
other entities). Business model scalability of the company embedded in the network can be conducted
according to the following criteria:
(1) In terms of size—the ability to add/remove components of the business model.
(2) Geographical—the possibility of spreading (acquisition and transfer through a network) business
model components in different locations of the network.
(3) Administrative—the possibility of different hierarchies of business model configuration
coordination from the perspective of the company (company co-ordination) and/or a network
perspective (network coordination).
Business model scalability refers, inter alia, to:
- adjusting the size of the company to the expectations of the market,
- adjusting the volume of engaged resources to building an efficient, networked business model,
- adjusting the structure of costs and revenues,
- adjusting the selected technologies resulting from the above elements.
Oversizing or undersizing one of the above elements may have a negative influence on achieving
assumed performance by the company.
Scalability may be of vertical and/or horizontal nature.
Vertical scalability is scaling in which the components of the business model within a company
are added or removed.
Horizontal scalability involves scaling which is adding or removing companies embedded in the
network which creates its own network business model.
By way of analogy to information systems, business model scalability can be divided into:
- Linear—with an increase in the number of business model components, the company increases
its performance linearly, so the effectiveness of scaling is 100%. It also means there is infinite
scalability of the business model (Figure 4).
198
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
Figure 4. Linear scalability.
- Sub-linear—this means that with the expansion of the business model by other components,
company performance increases more and more slowly until it reaches a certain limit. This
means there is a finite business model scalability (Figure 5).
Figure 5. Sub-linear scalability.
- Negative—this means that with the expansion of the business model by other components,
company performance declines. This effect can be observed for companies not adapted to scaling
(Figure 6).
Figure 6. Negative scalability.
199
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
- Super-linear—this is a special case when company performance is growing faster than linearly
with an increasing number of business model components (Figure 7).
􀈱
Figure 7. Super-linear scalability.
Examining the concept of business model scalability, it is essential to define the attributes that
determine the design and operationalization towards its scalability.
Key features of the business model affecting its scalability, which ensure its ability to achieve high
company performance and are defined based on the literature, are presented in Table 3.
Table 3. Key features of the business model affecting its scalability.
No. Business Model Features
1. Dynamics
2. Adaptability
3. Repeatability
4. Coherence
5. Economization
6. Profitability
7. Innovation and e-innovation
8. The ability to migrate
9. Availability
10. The scale of impact
The measurement system used to measure business model scalability is implemented so that
the business model will be vulnerable to changes with respect to the environment; thus, it constantly
responds to market needs. Then measurement indicators serve to better understand the business model
and market needs relationship. The network is conducive to scalability as, through the relationships in
the network, it is easier to change the business and such changes may occur faster due to obtaining
information faster by participating in the network. Such performance measures that will relate more to
the business model rather than to the whole company should be sought within the business model,
so it is necessary to answer the question of whether the rules that govern the business are correct.
The appropriateness of the adopted business model should be constantly evaluated. Therefore, good
measures used to describe the business model are measures used in classic “business plans” and even
strategies and they are validated by clashing them with direct customers of the company. Therefore, the
concept of lean startup emerged, which is the concept appropriate for companies starting their activity.
It results from the assumption that it is difficult to measure a company’s achievements at the beginning
of the business if they have none yet. Instead, startup development in the early stages should be
measured (if possible) by means of appropriate qualitative and quantitative measures. Qualitative
200
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
measures will describe a business model in terms of its attributes (e.g., business model innovation),
while quantitative measures include, in the case of e-business models using Internet communities, for
example, the number of users that can increase or decrease and the measure may be, for example, the
dynamics of growth or decline.
In view of the above reflections, it can be assumed that the issue of designing scalable business
models is now a key challenge for both theoreticians and practitioners of management. The design
process, or design in short, is a substantial and creative activity of man that is a conceptual and
pragmatic preparation (related to methodology) for executive functions. This general expression
contains the creative feature of the design, and therefore it gives it more or less originality. The sense of
preparation is obvious, because the design is the structure to be verified, and then implemented [140]
(p. 168).
The art of designing a model of the customer-oriented company activity begins with the single
most important element—getting to know the customer and going on to develop the correct design.
Managers actually focusing their attention on the customer always make other decisions related to
the scope of activity. Their first question is not what the core competencies of the company are, but
what their importance to the customer is. They will make the company offer products based on what a
customer needs, wants and what he or she is willing to pay [72] (p. 50).
The process of designing the business model in a synthetic way can be divided into
thefollowing steps:
(1) Outlining the concept of the designed business model (business idea, potential recipients of
values, characteristics of produced value and method of delivering this value to customers, etc.).
(2) Developing strategic objectives of the business model configuration.
(3) Developing the necessary financial analyses to implement the business model in
market conditions.
(4) Linking the financial aspects of the business model feasibility with the aspects related to the
assumptions of its design.
(5) Identifying weaknesses of the business model when it is treated as a system and in the case of
visible gaps, complementing the design of the business model.
(6) Identifying innovative features of the business model and their critical analysis.
(7) Assembling the business model in a system of features that allow for building capacity to compete.
(8) Designing the assumptions of the company management system based on business model
attributes [141] (pp. 29–30).
It should be remembered that in order to design a business model effectively, the trick is not only
to adopt the proper way of thinking and its attributes, but also to use them skillfully.
8. The Conceptualization of Business Model Scalability
The criteria of business model scalability can include:
- The ability to customize the technology to the customer’s expectations and requirements of
the product,
- The flexibility of infrastructure resources, expressed by the ability to adopt to their current needs
(increase or reduction of resources),
- The ability to reduce or increase costs adequately for the needs and resources used,
- The dynamics of processes are constantly adapted to respond to impulses from the environment,
- Continuous adaptability to changing legal requirements,
- The ability to use the network effect—the occurrence of the phenomenon consisting of the fact
that the more nodes a network has, the more benefits membership brings to individual nodes.
Each additional node in the network increases its value, encouraging more potential nodes to
join in,
201
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
- The acceptable level of adjusting the number of customers served to the capacity of the company,
- Continuous ability to improve the company’s business model,
- The ability to simplify the business model (if possible),
- The ability to continuously educate company customers,
- The ability to permanently deliver new value to the customer,
- The ability to transfer and internationalize the company business model,
- The ability of the business model to adjust to the differences arising from international,
cross-cultural, and legal exchange,
- The ability to create innovation through the business model,
- The ability to flexibly modify the business model depending on the internal and
external conditions,
- No restrictions in the location of the company,
- The ability of the company to form partnerships with the network members.
In the logical interpretation of the application of business model scalability, the mechanisms of
analogy can be used, referring to Moore’s law andWright’s law, which are widely used not only in
computer science [142].
In this sense, key assumptions of business model scalability can be developed using the principles
of Moore’s law andWright’s law.
(1) We treat the company embedded in the network as an organization capable of achieving high
performance through the network.
(2) We define core resources, processes and stakeholders of the company embedded in the network
that are necessary to build a scalable business model.
(3) We determine the technological and organizational boundaries of the business model of the
company embedded in the network.
(4) We convert the business model of the company embedded in the network into a discrete model.
(5) Using Moore’s law andWright’s law, we analyze how to expand the business model in the best
possible way in terms of components and apply the principle of how much we can reduce the
cost of its operation.
(6) We conduct a simulation of business model development assuming the boundary conditions for
the developed measuring system, being a tool of assessing the business model of the company
embedded in the network.
(7) Then we change the parameters of the business model and the structure of its components until
we adjust the founded discrete model to the actual situation in business.
(8) We validate the designed scalable business model by implementing it into practice.
(9) When conducting a further analysis of the business model scalability concept, it can be assumed
that the business model that is subject to scalability consists of two groups of components:
a. Primary components.
b. Secondary components.
Primary components constitute the core of the business model, being the basis for its building at
the stage of its design.
Secondary components are added to the business model in order to improve company
performance. They are an extension of primary components. Ensuring business model scalability is of
special importance in adding and removing them. The increasing complexity of the business model in
terms of a scalability criterion consists of incremental change in the business model components as a
function of time. Figure 8 shows the concept of incremental changes in the business model components
of the network company by the scalability criterion.
202
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
Incremental change in business model components in the scalability criterion
Biulding business
model primary
components
K1 Kn
Increase in business
model secondary
components
Kn Km
Time
+ Kn Increasing
complexity of the
business model in
the criterion of
scalability
Business model
primary
components
Business
model
secondary
components
􀃭 Km
K1
Kn
Kn2
K4
K3
Kn1
K2
Kn3
Km
Company
performance
Figure 8. The concept of incremental change in the business model components of the
network/company by the scalability criterion.
In order to determine business model scalability, its proper configuration has to be defined. This
configuration can be determined using the QCA method. A Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA)
was first proposed by Charles Ragin in 1987 as a method of analyzing data sets, which include binary
variables [143]. By adopting this method, a list of all possible configurations of n components of
the business model can be defined which affect its scalability in the context of the impact that this
configuration has on the performance of the company embedded in the network.
It is worth noting that the QCA integrates qualitative and quantitative research methods [144].
Table 4 presents the matrix of possible configurations for a business model built with four
components, along with defining the key configurations for this relationship.
203
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
Table 4. The model matrix of possible configurations for a business model built with four components,
along with defining the key configurations for this relationship.
Configuration Component 1 Component 2 Component 3 Component 4 High Performance
1 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 1
3 0 0 1 0
4 0 0 1 1
5 0 1 0 0
6 0 1 0 1
7 0 1 1 0
8 0 1 1 1 1
9 1 0 0 0
10 1 0 0 1
11 1 0 1 0
12 1 0 1 1
13 1 1 0 0
14 1 1 0 1 1
15 1 1 1 0
16 1 1 1 1
For example, high company performance is achieved with configurations 8 and 14 of the business
model. In the case of configuration number 8: High Performance = 1 if K1 = 0 and K2 = 1 and K3 = 1
and K4 = 1
In the case of configuration number 14: High Performance = 1 if K1 = 1 and K2 = 1 and K3 = 0
and K4 = 1
High performance is, therefore, a variable dependent on the configuration of independent
variables (business model component 1, component 2, component 3 and component 4) observed
in such a way that all 16 possible configurations could be evaluated. The configuration assessment
process can be repeated for the primary components of the business model. Then components can be
added or removed and it is possible to evaluate with what configurations the company can achieve
high performance. It is very important as scalability, by adding and removing components, focuses
on quantitative assessment. The premise of business model scalability is a dynamic change in the
number of its components, which is quantitative in nature. Additionally, achieving the configuration
of components favorable to high performance is qualitative. In this context, it is reasonable to use the
QCA method.
9. The Operationalization of Scalability in Sustainable Business Models of Hybrid Organizations
In order to perform the operationalization of sustainable business model scalability, the first step is
to define a sustainable business model canvas composed of the so-called primary components. Primary
components are also called indispensable components, without which a business model cannot exist.
In the scientific discourse on the operationalization of scalability in the sustainable business
models of hybrid organizations, a nine-component business model canvas by A. Osterwalder and
Y. Pigneur [73,145,146] was applied (Figure 9). The structure of this model is focused on the
operationalization attributes of the business model helping the company to achieve high performance.
Based on the verification of network attributes defined in the literature and described in Section 3,
key network attributes have been identified which, selected by multivariate bibliographic analysis,
shape its business model, determining the network development in a given function of time. The use
of multivariate analysis aimed to reduce a large amount of collected data and information to several
important categories, which could be used as a subject of further analysis and to obtain groups of
objects homogeneous in terms of properties describing them, which then makes it easier to determine
their key properties.
204
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
􀈱
Figure 9. Business model canvas by A. Osterwalder, Y. Pigneur [73,145,146].
Assuming that business model scalability is associated with the functioning of the company in
the network environment, the attributes of this model are focused precisely on the network. Therefore,
while reviewing network attributes, the canvas of a networked, scalable business model consisting
of its key attributes which determine that the company is embedded in this environment may be
proposed (Figure 10).
Figure 10. The canvas of a networked scalable business model.
The proposed nine attributes of a networked, scalable business model make it possible to use it in
the network.
205
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
While ensuring the ability of the company to survive, it is important to find mechanisms for
functioning by which, by following the principles of sustainability, business continuity is ensured, its
values are created, and high performance is achieved at the same time.
The proposal for a nine-component canvas of a sustainable business model based on longitudinal
research and bibliographic research is shown in Figure 11.
Figure 11. Sustainable business model canvas composed of primary components.
The next step in the operationalization of a scalable business model is to determine mechanisms
for key features of the business model that affect its scalability. This is described in Table 5.
Table 5. Key features of the business model affecting its scalability.
No. Key Features of the Business
Model Affecting Its Scalability Adopted Operationalization Mechanisms
1. Dynamics Shaping changes in the business model configuration dynamically.
2. Adaptability Continuous adaptation to permanent changes.
3. Repeatability
Continuous repetition of behavior patterns using the business
model and generating reproducible value materializing in
increased profit.
4. Coherence Ensuring continuous business model integrity for its
maximum functionality.
5. Economization Business model commercialization at fixed time intervals.
6. Profitability Ensuring continuous profit from the business model.
7. Innovation Creating innovative behavior while still being a leader. Avoiding
imitation in building a business model.
8. The ability to migrate
Searching, adding, removing and subsequently configuring
business model components obtained from networks surrounding
the company.
9. Availability Ensuring the possibility of using the business model at any time and
place. The possibility of interfering with the business model quickly.
10. The scale of impact Continuous expansion of the usage of the business model.
Expanding the boundaries of business.
206
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
The next step of operationalization for the defined primary components of a sustainable business
model is to determine the mechanisms for their scalability, as shown in Table 6.
Table 6. Scalability mechanisms for a sustainable business model attribute.
L.P. Primary Component of a Sustainable
Business Model
Scalability Mechanisms Used for a Sustainable
Business Model Attribute
1. Stakeholder network Seeking synergy, symbiosis and symmetry
between various stakeholders in the company.
2. Shareholders structure Seeking the common goal and common values in
the functioning shareholders structure.
3. Key resources Seeking optimal configuration mechanisms based
on own resources.
4. Key corporate governance factors
Seeking a coherent system for the exchange of
information, data and knowledge in the process
of mutual reporting and supervision.
5. Key corporate social responsibility factors Seeking correlations between corporate social
responsibility factors.
6. Key value-based management factors Seeking correlations between value-based
management factors.
7. Key Sustainability factors Seeking correlations between
sustainability factors.
8. Financial dividend Applying the principle of sustainable dividends.
9. Social dividend
Applying the mechanisms creating social capital
in conjunction with the expectations of the
various groups of stakeholders.
The primary components should be extended by the secondary components, which, for a
sustainable business model, have been proposed in Table 7. It is also necessary to define scalability
mechanisms for the secondary attributes of a sustainable business model, as shown in Table 8.
Table 7. The list of secondary sustainable business model components.
No. List of Secondary Sustainable Business Model Components
1. Quality of a product/service
2. Innovation of a product/service
3. Environmental performance of a product/service
4. Product safety
5. Technologies
6. Trust
7. Company image and brand awareness
8. Competence
9. Relationships with customers
10. Social capital
207
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
Table 8. Scalability mechanisms for the secondary attributes of a sustainable business model.
No. Secondary Components of a
Sustainable Business Model
Scalability Mechanisms Used for the
Sustainable Business Model Attributes
1. Quality of a product/service
Seeking high quality products/services with
regard to ensuring repeatability
and standardization
2. Innovation of a product/service
Seeking a high level of innovation while
achieving a high quality of products/services
3. Environmental performance of a
product/service
Seeking the mutual fulfillment of
environmental criteria, taking into account
qualitative criteria, implementing the principles
of ecological quality.
4. Product safety
Seeking a high level of safety while maintaining
procedural conduct and implementation of the
standardization principles.
5. Technologies
Seeking mechanisms for optimum
configuration at the level of conceptualization
and operationalization of
technological solutions.
6. Trust
Seeking standards of conduct and
implementation of mutual communication
principles so that trust is not destroyed.
7. Company image and
brand awareness
Seeking the principles of building brand value
while implementing the
standardization principles.
8. Competence
Seeking mechanisms for the optimum
configuration of staff qualifications, training,
experience and skills.
9. Relationships with customers
Seeking mechanisms for mutual
communication and mutual exchange of values
in order to ensure optimum value for
value relationships.
10. Social capital
Seeking mechanisms for mutual
communication to develop social potential and
social participation.
The next step taken in order to determine sustainable business model scalability for the defined
components is applying the QCA (Qualitative Comparative Analysis) method described in the
previous section.
The process of configuration assessment involves repeating actions aimed at adding or removing
components from the business model’s primary components and then the secondary ones and assessing
in which configurations the company can achieve high performance.
10. Discussion
Scalability and sustainability of the business model seem to be an important area of scientific
exploration of strategic management mechanisms. Scalability is important for constantly arising
dilemmas by seeking answers about to what extent to expand or reduce business models while
maintaining high company performance. Sustainability is important as a way to ensure the continuity
of business using the owned business model is continuously sought. After multidimensional reflections,
the following conclusions, which are the source of scientific debate, are presented below:
(1) Scalability and sustainability are key attributes of the business model of the hybrid organization.
208
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
(2) In order for a business model to be sustainable, it must first of all be scalable.
(3) A hybrid organization is an organization, which has a scalable business model that can be
sustainable as long as possible, achieving high performance.
(4) An effective business model is a model of an organization that, due to the proper configuration
of its attributes, is capable of scalability and sustainability.
(5) A scalable and sustainable business model should be built from primary and secondary attributes.
(6) Primary attributes are non-transferable and secondary attributes of the business model can be
added or removed depending on the strategic context of the company.
(7) Scaling depends on the ability of the business model to expand or be reduced.
(8) The adopted operationalization mechanisms should create a pattern of behavior which ensures
that the adopted business model is used to the full extent.
(9) Defined attributes that make up the configuration should ensure business model functionality
such that the company achieves high performance.
11. Conclusions
It is essential to use scalability in the conceptualization and operationalization of a sustainable
business model of hybrid organizations in the network environment to achieve their high performance.
The search for the appropriate business model configuration in the system of controlling its components
incrementally seems to be an important factor in determining its functioning, ensuring adequate
dynamics. The adopted and described logic of using scalability as a key attribute of a sustainable
business model can provide a platform for further implementation and discussions aimed at searching
for mechanisms of enhancing company performance. Using the primary and secondary components
of the business model, configured by using the QCA method, provides a chance to match a business
model to the most effective structure.
To sum up the theses contained in the paper, the core conclusions that are the basis for further
scientific discussion should be defined.
(1) The developed assumptions of the business model scalability concept indicate that the concept of
scalability is a management science theory that is possible to develop further, especially because
of the constant search for features describing its scalability
(2) The proposed attributes of sustainable business model scalability are important to increase the
chance of survival and development in a difficult, dynamically challenging market environment.
(3) Skillful scaling of the business model in time is a core attribute of companies that are characterized
by the ability to change.
(4) Business model scalability is not an easy issue in the research process. This is due to the fact that
scalability is based on a set of quality features describing the company’s business model at any
given time. The more accurate the description of the business model configuration is, the easier
it is to capture the components responsible for business model scalability.
(5) Scalability is a temporary feature, which can be easily lost, for example, when an inefficient
configuration of linked business model components appears. Therefore, there is a need to
continuously measure and monitor the characteristics describing business model scalability.
(6) The performance of the business model depends on its scalability which results from the
dynamics of adding and removing individual components, and this can very often be the result
of unconscious actions taken by managers or unplanned effects of configuration changeability.
(7) Scalability is therefore a development concept that in times of environment changeability becomes
a determinant and condition of the survival of modern companies.
Theoretical and research limitations resulting from the above reflections include:
(1) A small amount of research on business model scalability.
(2) The complex nature of the interpretation of business model sustainability.
209
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
(3) Variability in the environment that gives rise to new research dilemmas related to the features
and attributes of business models.
The author believes that on the basis of longitudinal and bibliographic research, it can be assumed
that the hypotheses are proven.
Hypothesis 1. Scalability and sustainability are key determinants of building a business model of
the hybrid organizations embedded in a network environment.
Hypothesis 2. The network environment is favorable to building sustainable business models that
are highly scalable.
Hypothesis 3. In order for a business model of the hybrid organizations to be sustainable, it must
first of all be scalable.
The author has proven the hypotheses based on the above research.
Conflicts of Interest: Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.
References
1. Kimberly, J.R. Issues in the Design of Longitudinal Organizational Research. Sociol. Methods Res. 1976, 4,
321–348. [CrossRef]
2. Venkatesh, A.; Vitalari, N.P. Longitudinal Surveys in Information Systems Research: An Examination of
Issues, Methods, and Applications. In The Information Systems Challenge: Survey Research Methods; Harvard
University Press: Location, UK, 1991; pp. 115–144.
3. Janson, C. Some Problems of Longitudinal Research in the Social Sciences. In Longitudinal Research: Methods
and Uses in Behavioral Science; Schulsinger, F., Mednick, S., Knop, J., Eds.; Martinus Nijhoff Publishing: Boston,
MA, USA, 1981.
4. Jourdan, Z.; Rainer, K.; Marshall, T. Business Intelligence: An Analysis of the Literature. Inform. Syst. Manag.
2008, 25, 121–131. [CrossRef]
5. Massaro, M.; Dumay, J.; Guthrie, J. On the Shoulders of Giants: Undertaking a Structured Literature Review
in Accounting, Accounting. Audit. Account. J. 2015, 28, 267–284.
6. World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices. In World Economic Situation and Prospects
2015; OECD Economic Outlook, Volume 2015/1 © OECD 2015–Preliminary Version; International Monetary
Fund: Washington, DC, USA, 2015.
7. Porter, M.E. Competitive Advantage, Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance; The Free Press: New York,
NY, USA, 1985.
8. Mintzberg, H.; Ahlstrand, B.; Lampel, J. Strategy safari: The complete guide through the wilds of strategic
management, FT Prentice Hall, London 1998. In Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior
Performance; Porter, M.E., Ed.; The Free Press: New York, NY, USA, 1985.
9. Volberda, H.W., Elfring, T., Eds.; Rethinking Strategy; SAGE: London, UK, 2001.
10. Farjoun, M. Towards an organic perspective on strategy. Strateg. Manag. J. 2002, 23, 561–594. [CrossRef]
11. Freeman, R.E. Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach; Pitman: Boston, MA, USA, 1984.
12. Clarkson, M. A risk Based Model of Stakeholder Theory. In Proceedings of the Second Toronto Conference
of Stakeholder Theory; Centre for Corporate Social Performance and Ethics, University of Toronto: Toronto,
ON, Canada, 1994.
13. Lantgry, B. Stakeholders and Moral Responsibilities of Business. Bus. Ethics Quart. 1994, 4, 431–443.
14. Harrison, J.G. Strategic Management of Organisation and Stakeholder;West: St. Paul, MN, USA, 1994.
15. Mitchell, R.K. Toward A Theory of Stakeholder. Identification and Salience: Defining the Principle of Who
and What Really Counts. Acad. Manag. Rev. 1997, 22, Article 4.
16. Freeman, E.; Reed, D. Stockholders and Stakeholders: A New Perspective on Corporate Governance.
Calif. Manag. Rev. 1983, 25, 88–106. [CrossRef]
17. Svendsen, A. The Stakeholder Strategy. In Profiting from Collaborative Business Relationships; Berret-Koehler
Publishers, Inc.: San Francisco, CA, USA, 1998.
210
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
18. Morin, R.A.; Jarrell, S.L. Driving Shareholder Value: Value–Building Techniques for Creating Shareholder Wealth;
McGraw-Hill: New York, NY, USA, 2001.
19. Martin, J.D.; Petty, J.W.; Wallace, J.S. Value–Based Management with Corporate Social Responsibility; University
Press: Oxford, UK, 2009.
20. Fu, R.; Qiu, L.; Quyang, L. A Networking-based View of Business Model Innovation: Theory and Method,
A Networking-based View of Business Model Innovation. Commun. IIMA 2006, 6, Article 7.
21. Calia, R.C.; Guerrini, F.M.; Moura, G.L. Innovation networks: From technological development to business
model reconfiguration. Technovation 2007, 27, 426–432. [CrossRef]
22. Voelpel, S.; Leibold, M.; Tekie, E.; von Krogh, G. Escaping the Red Queen Effect in Competitive Strategy:
Sense-testing Business Models. Eur. Manag. J. 2005, 23, 37–49. [CrossRef]
23. Wirtz, B.W.; Schilke, O.; Ullrich, S. Strategic Development of Business Models Implications of the Web 2.0 for
Creating Value on the Internet. Long Range Plan. 2010, 43, 272–290. [CrossRef]
24. Hakanson, H. International Marketing and Purchasing of Industrial Goods: An Interaction Approach; Wiley:
Chichester, UK, 1982.
25. Pfeffer, J.; Salancik, G. The External Control of Organisations; Harper and Row: New York, NY, USA, 1978.
26. Cook, K.S.; Emerson, R. Exchange Networks and the Analysis of Complex Organisations, Research of the Sociology
of Organisations; JAI press: Greenwich, CT, USA, 1984; Volume 3.
27. Porter, M.E. Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors; The Free Press: New York,
NY, USA, 1980.
28. Williamson, O.E. Markets and Hierarchies, Analysis and Antitrust Implications: A Study in the Economics of
Internal Organization; Free Press: New York, NY, USA, 1975.
29. Borgatti, S.P. The Network Paradigm in Organizational Research: A Review and Typology. J. Manag. 2003,
29, 991–1013.
30. Hakanson, H.; Snehota, I. Developing Relationships in Business Networks; Routledge: London, UK, 2005.
31. Martin-Rios, C. Why do firms seek to share human resource management knowledge? The importance of
inter-firm networks. J. Bus. Res. 2014, 67, 190–199. [CrossRef]
32. Jarillo, J.C. Strategic Networks; Creating the Borderless Organization, Butterworth—Heinemann: Oxford,
UK, 1995.
33. Perechuda, K. Dyfuzja Wiedzy w Przedsi˛ebiorstwie Sieciowym. Wizualizacja i Kompozycja; Wydawnictwo
Uniwersytetu Ekonomicznego weWrocławiu: Wrocław, Poland, 2013. (In Polish)
34. Hooley, G.J.; Saunders, J.A.; Piercy, N.F. Marketing Strategy and Competitive Positioning; Prentice Hall:
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA, 1998.
35. Achrol, R. Changes in the theory of interorganizational relations in marketing: Toward network paradigm.
J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 1997, 25, 56–71. [CrossRef]
36. Czakon, W. Sieci w Zarza˛dzaniu Strategicznym; Oficyna a Wolters Kluwer Business: Warszawa, Poland, 2012.
37. Gorynia, M.; Jankowska, B. Teorie internacjonalizacji. Gospodarka Narodowa. 2007, 10, 21–44. (In Polish)
38. Jaki, A. Mechanizmy rozwoju paradygmatów zarza˛dzania. Przegla˛d Organizacji 2014, 2, 8–13.
39. Płoszaj, A. Sieci Instytucji Otoczenia Biznesu; Scholar: Warszawa, Poland, 2013. (In Polish)
40. Ko´zmi´ nski, A.K.; Latusek-Jurczak, D. Rozwój Teorii Organizacji, Od Systemu do Sieci; Oficyna aWolters Kluwer
business: Warszawa, Poland, 2011. (In Polish)
41. Nogalski, B.; ´Srednicka, J. Dyfuzja logiki sieci i jej znaczenie dla współpracy organizacyjnej w warunkach
niepewnos´ci i niecia˛głos´ci współczesnej gospodarki. In Nauki o Zarza˛dzaniu Wobec Nieprzewidywalnos´ci i
Złoz˙onos´ci Zmian, Praca Zbiorowa pod Redakcja˛ J. Rokity, Górnos´la˛ska Wyz˙sza Szkoła Handlowa im; Wojciecha
Korfantego: Katowice, Poland, 2011. (In Polish)
42. Brilman, J. Nowoczesne Koncepcje i Metody Zarza˛dzania; Polskie Wydawnictwo Ekonomiczne: Warszawa,
Poland, 2002. (In Polish)
43. Stachowicz, J. Rola i udział koryfeusza nauk zarza˛dzania w okresie wyłaniania sie˛ nowego paradygmatu
nauk o zarza˛dzaniu. In Irena Hejduk i Andrzej Herman; Przyszłos´ci, D., Ed.; Difin: Warszawa, Poland, 2014.
(In Polish)
44. Noga, A. Sieci w Uje˛ciu Teorii Ekonomii. In Relacje Mie˛dzyorganizacyjne w Naukach o Zarza˛dzaniu; Praca
zbiorowa pod red. naukowa˛; Koz´min´ skiego, A.K., Latusek-Jurczak, D., Eds.; Oficyna a Wolters Kluwer
business: Warszawa, Poland, 2014. (In Polish)
211
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
45. Niemczyk, J. Strategia, od Planu do Sieci; Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Ekonomicznego we Wrocławiu:
Wrocław, Poland, 2013. (In Polish)
46. Hakansson, H.; Snehota, I. No business is an island: The network concept of business strategy. Scand. J. Mgmt.
2006, 22, 256–270. [CrossRef]
47. Watts, D.J. Networks Dynamics and the Small-World Phenomenon. Am. J. Soc. 1999, 105, 493–527.
48. Ciesielski, M., Ed.; Sieci w Gospodarce; Polskie Wydawnictwo Ekonomiczne: Warszawa, Poland, 2013.
(In Polish)
49. De Man, A.P. The Network Economy. Strategy, Structure and Management; Edward Elgar: Cheltenham, UK, 2004.
50. Niemczyk, J.; Sta ´ nczyk-Hugiet, E.; Jasi ´ nski, B. Sieci Mi˛edzyorganizacyjne, Współczesne Wyzwanie dla Teorii i
Praktyki Zarza˛dzania; C.H. Beck: Warszawa, Poland, 2012. (In Polish)
51. Rybicki, J.M. My´slenie Geometryczne w Teorii Strategii Organizacji; Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Gda´ nskiego:
Gda´ nsk, Poland, 2013. (In Polish)
52. Hakansson, H.; Ford, D. How should companies interact in business networks? J. Bus. Res. 2002, 55, 133–139.
[CrossRef]
53. Krzakiewicz, K. Zastosowanie podejs´cia sieciowego w zarza˛dzaniu strategicznym. In Organizacja i
Zarza˛dzanie; Zeszyt pie˛c´dziesia˛ty drugi, Zeszyty naukowe nr 1147; Politechnika Łódzka: Łódz´, Poland, 2013.
(In Polish)
54. Cyfert, S. Granice Organizacji;Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Ekonomicznego w Poznaniu: Pozna´ n, Poland,
2012. (In Polish)
55. Cyfert, S.; Krzakiewicz, K. Granice w ´swiecie sieciowych i wirtualnych organizacji. In Granice Strukturalnej
Zło˙zono´sci Organizacji; Redakcja Naukowa Agnieszka Sopi ´ nski, Sylwester Gregorczyk; Oficyna Wydawnicza,
Szkoła Główna Handlowa: Warszawa, Poland, 2014. (In Polish)
56. Zimniewicz, S. Orkiestracja sieci według Li & Fung Ltd. In Zarza˛dzanie Łan´ cuchami Dostaw; Ciesielski, M.,
Ed.; PWE: Warszawa, Poland, 2011. (In Polish)
57. Perechuda, K. Wirtualizacja procesów opartych na wiedzy podstawa˛ nowoczesnego niewolnictwa. Nowe
paradygmaty i determinanty przestrzeni przepływów w przedsi˛ebiorstwie sieciowym. In Wirtualizacja,
Problemy, Wyzwania, Skutki; Zacher, L.W., Ed.; Poltext: Warszawa, Poland, 2013. (In Polish)
58. Goold, M.; Campbell, A. Structured Networks towards the Well-Designed Matrix. Long Range Plan. 2003, 36,
427–439. [CrossRef]
59. Powell, W.W.; White, D.R. Network Dynamics and Field Evolution: The Growth of Interorganizational
Collaboration in the Life Sciences. Am. J. Sociol. 2005, 110, 1132–1205. [CrossRef]
60. Cygler, J.; Sroka, W. Structural pathologies in inter-organizational networks and their consequences.
Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 2014, 110, 52–63. [CrossRef]
61. Stan´ czyk-Hugiet, E.; Gorgól, J. Elementy sieci mie˛dzyorganizacyjnych–aspekty organizacyjno-zarza˛dcze.
In Sieci Mie˛dzyorganizacyjne. Współczesne Wyzwanie dla Teorii i Praktyki Zarza˛dzania; Niemczyk, J.,
Sta ´ nczyk-Hugiet, E., Jasi ´ nski, B., Eds.; C.H. Beck: Warszawa, Poland, 2012. (In Polish)
62. Yuchtman, R.F.; Seashore, S. A system resource approach to organizationaleffectiveness. Am. Sociol. Rev.
1967, 32, 891–903. [CrossRef]
63. Mitr˛ega, M. Zdolno´sci sieciowe małych i ´srednich przedsi˛ebiorstwa a jako´s´c relacji z klientami. HandelWewn.
2010, 2, 27–32. (In Polish)
64. Zott, C.; Amit, R.; Massa, L. The Business Model: Theoretical Roots, Recent Developments, and Future
Research. Available online: http://www.iese.edu/research/pdfs/DI-0862-E.pdf (accessed on June 2010).
65. Wirtz, B.W. Business Model Management Design–Instrumente–Erfolgsfaktoren von Geschäftsmodellen; Gabler
Verlag/Springer FachmedienWiesbaden GmbH: Berlin, Germany, 2011.
66. Teece, D.J. Business Models, Business Strategy and Innovation. Long Range Plan. 2010, 43, 172–194. [CrossRef]
67. Obłój, K. Pasja i Dyscyplina Strategii, Jak z Marze´n i Decyzji Zbudowa´c Sukces Firmy; Poltext: Warszawa, Poland,
2010. (In Polish)
68. Goł˛ebiowski, T.; Dudzik, T.M.; Lewandowska, M.; Witek-Hajduk, M. Modele Biznesu Polskich Przedsi˛ebiorstw;
Szkoła Główna Handlowa: Warszawa, Poland, 2008. (In Polish)
69. Timmers, P. Electronic Commerce: Strategies and Models from Business-to-Business Trading; Wiley & Sons:
Chichester, UK, 1999.
212
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
70. Rappa, M. Managing the Digital Enterprise: Business Models on the Web, 2002, Retrieved May 14. Available
online: http://digitalenterprise.org/models/models.html (accessed on 14 May 2002).
71. Applegate, L.M. E-Business Models: Making Sense of the Internet Business Landscape. In Information
Technology and the New Enterprise: Future Models for Managers; Applegate, L.M., Dickson, G.W., DeSanctis, G.,
Eds.; Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2000.
72. Slyvotzky, A.J.; Morrison, D.J.; Andelman, B. Strefa Zysku; PWE:Warszawa, Poland, 2000.
73. Osterwalder, A.; Pigneur, Y. An e-Business Model Ontology for Modeling e-Business. In Proceedings of the
15th Bled Electronic Commerce Conference e-Reality: Constructing the e-Economy, Bled, Slovenia, 17–19
June 2002.
74. Bossidy, L.; Charan, R. Szósty Zmysł w Zarza˛dzaniu Firma˛. Tworzenie Wykonalnych Planów i Modeli Biznesowych;
MT Biznes: Warszawa, Poland, 2010. (In Polish)
75. Niemczyk, J. Modele biznesowe. In Zarza˛dzanie. Kanony i Trendy; Morawski, M., Niemczyk, J., Perechuda, K.,
Sta ´ nczyk-Hugiet, E., Eds.; Beck, C.H.: Warszawa, Poland, 2010. (In Polish)
76. Seddon, P.B.; Lewis, G.P.; Freeman, P.; Shanks, G. The Case for Viewing Business Models as Abstractions of
Strategy. Commun. Assoc. Inform. Syst. 2004, 13, 426–442.
77. De Witt, B.; Meyer, R. Synteza Strategii, Tworzenie Strategii Konkurencyjnej Przez Tworzenie Paradoksów; Polskie
Wydawnictwo Ekonomiczne: Warszawa, Poland, 2007.
78. Hoque, F. The Alignment Effect: How to Get Real Business Value Out of Technology; Financial Times Prentice
Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2002.
79. Jabłon´ ski, A. Modele biznesu w sektorach pojawiaja˛cych sie˛ i schyłkowych. In Tworzenie Przewagi
Konkurencyjnej Przedsi˛ebiorstwa Opartej na Jako´sci i Kryteriach Ekologicznych;WydawnictwoWy˙ zszej Szkoły
Biznesu w Da˛browie Górniczej: Da˛browa Górnicza, Poland, 2008. (In Polish)
80. Jabło ´ nski, A.; Jabło ´ nski, M. Projektowanie sieciowych modeli biznesu. Ekonomika i Organizacja
Przedsi˛ebiorstwa. 2013, 12, 29–39. (In Polish)
81. Cyfert, S.; Krzakiewicz, K. Wykorzystanie koncepcji modeli biznesu w zasobowej teorii firmy. In Rozwój
Szkoły Zasobowej Zarza˛dzania Strategicznego; Krupskiego, R., Ed.; Prace Naukowe Wałbrzyskiej Wyz˙ szej
Szkoły Zarza˛dzania i Przedsie˛biorczos´ci: Wałbrzych, Poland, 2011. (In Polish)
82. Demil, B.; Lecocq, X. Business model evolution: In search of dynamic consistency. Long Range Plan. 2010, 43,
2–3. [CrossRef]
83. Sandberg, K.D. Is It Time to Trade In Your Business Model? Harvard University Update 2002.
84. Afuah, A.; Tucci, C. Biznes Internetowy Strategie i Modele; Oficyna ekonomiczna: Kraków, Czech Republic,
2003. (In Polish)
85. Nogalski, B. Modele biznesu jako narz˛edzia reorientacji strategicznej przedsi˛ebiorstw. MBA 2009, 2, 3–14.
86. Deodhar, S.J.; Saxena, K.; Gupta, R.K.; Ruohonen, M. Strategies for software-based hybrid business models.
J. Strateg. Inform. Syst. 2012, 21, 274–294. (In Polish) [CrossRef]
87. Jabło ´ nski, A. Spójno´s´c Hybrydy Strategicznej w ´ Srodowisku Sieciowym; Difin: Warszawa, Poland, 2015.
(In Polish)
88. Stubbs,W.; Cocklin, C. Conceptualizing a “sustainability business model”. Org. Environ. 2008, 21, 103–127.
[CrossRef]
89. Boons, F.; Lüdeke-Freund, F. Business models for sustainable innovation: State of the art and steps towards a
research agenda. J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 45, 9–19. [CrossRef]
90. Jabło ´ nski, A. Modele Zrównowa˙zonego Biznesu w Budowie Długoterminowej Warto´sci Przedsi˛ebiorstw z
Uwzgl˛ednieniem ich Społecznej Odpowiedzialno´sci; Difin: Warszawa, Poland, 2013. (In Polish)
91. Neely, A.; Delbridge, R. Effective Business Models: What Do They Mean for Whitehall. 2007. Available
online: http://www.nationalschool.gov.uk/sunningdaleiinstitute.
92. Epstein, M.J.; Rejc Buhovac, A. Solving the sustainability implementation challenge. Org. Dyn. 2010, 39,
306–315. [CrossRef]
93. Dyllick, T.; Hockerts, K. Beyond the business case for corporate sustainability. Bus. Strategy Environ. 2002, 11.
[CrossRef]
94. Mc Donough,W.; Braugnart, M. The next industrial revolution. The Atlantic Monthly, October 1998.
213
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
95. Daud Ahmed, M.; Sundaram, D. Sustainability modelling and reporting: From roadmap to implementation.
Decis. Support Syst. 2012, 53, 611–624. [CrossRef]
96. Yunus, M.; Moingeon, B.; Lehman-Ortega, L. Biulding Social Business Models: Lessons from the Grameen
Experience. Long Range Plann. 2010, 43, 308–325. [CrossRef]
97. Kotler, P.; Kartajaya, H.; Setiawan, I. Marketing 3.0, Dobry produkt? Zadowolony klient? Spełniony Człowiek!;
MT Biznes: Warszawa, Poland, 2010. (In Polish)
98. Nogalski, B. Idea strategii “błe˛kitnego oceanu” w rozwia˛zywaniu kluczowych problemów polskich
przedsie˛biorstw w zakresie zarza˛dzania. In Ku Nowym Paradygmatom Nauk o Zarza˛dzaniu, Praca Zbiorowa pod
Redakcja˛ J. Rokity, Wydawnictwo Górnos´la˛skiej Wyz˙szej Szkoły Handlowej im;Wojciecha Korfantego: Katowice,
Poland, 2008. (In Polish)
99. Osterwalder, A.; Pigneur, Y. Aligning Profit and Purpose through Business Model Innovation. In Responsible
Management Practices for the 21 Century; Palazzo, G.,Wentland, M., Eds.; Pearson Education France: Paris,
France, 2011.
100. Schaltegger, S.; Lüdeke-Freund, F.; Hansen, E. Business Cases for Sustainability: The Role of Business Model
Innovation for Corporate Sustainability. Int. J. Innov. Sustain. Dev. 2012, 6, 95–119. [CrossRef]
101. Schwarz, P. Organisation in Nonprofit-Organisationen, Grundlagen, Strukturen; Haupt Verlag: Bern,
Switzerland, 2005.
102. Grudzewski, W.M.; Hejduk, I.K.; Sankowska, A.; Wan´ tuchowicz, M. Zarza˛dzanie Zaufaniem w Organizacjach
Wirtualnych; Difin: Warszawa, Poland, 2007. (In Polish)
103. Abidin, N.Z.; Pasquire, C.L. Revolutionize value management: A mode towards sustainability.
Int. J. Proj. Manag. 2007, 25, 275–282. [CrossRef]
104. Ultsch, A. The Integration of Connectionist Models with Knowledge-Based Systems: Hybrid Systems.
In Proceedings of the IEEE SMC 98 International Conference, San Diego, CA, USA, 14 October 1998.
105. Grassl, W. Business Models of Social Enterprise: A Design Approach to Hybridity. ACRN J. Entrep. Perspect.
2012, 1, 37–60.
106. Brozek, K.O. Exploring the Continuum of Social and Financial Returns: When Does a Nonprofit Become a
Social Enterprise? Community Dev. Invest. Rev. 2009, 5, 7–17.
107. Boyd, B.; Henning, N.; Reyna, E.; Wang, D.E.; Welch, M.D. Hybrid Organizations: New Business Models for
Environmental Leadership; Greenleaf: Sheffield, UK, 2009.
108. Brandsen, T.; Van de Donk, W.; Putters, K. Griffins or Chameleons? Hybridity as a Permanent and Inevitable
Characteristic of the Third Sector. Int. J. Public Admin. 2005, 28, 9–10. [CrossRef]
109. Defourny, J.; Nyssens, M. Conceptions of Social Enterprise in Europe and the United States: Convergences
and Divergences. J. Soc. Entrep. 2010, 1, 32–53.
110. Billis, D. Hybrid Organizations and the Third Sector; Basingstoke: Palgrave, Macmillan, 2010.
111. Alter, S.K. Social Enterprise Models and Their Mission and Money Relationships. In Social Entrepreneurship:
New Models of Sustainable Social Change; Nicholls, A., Ed.; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2006.
112. Malki, S. Social Entrepreneurship and Complexity Models: Goldstein. Hazy Silberstang 2009.
113. Bruni, L.S. Zamagni, Civil Economy: Efficiency, Equity, Public Happiness; Peter Lang: Bern, Switzerland, 2007.
114. Becchetti, L.; Bruni, L.; Zamagni, S. Microeconomia: Scelte, Relazioni, Economiacivile; ilMulino: Bologna, Italy,
2011. (In Polish)
115. Bruni, L. L’ethos del mercato. In Un’introduzioneaifondamentiantropologici e Relazio-nalidell’economia;
Mondadori: Milan Italy, 2010. (In Polish)
116. Lusch, R.F.; Vargo, S.L. Service-dominant Logic: A Necessary Step. European. J. Mark. 2011, 45, 1298–1309.
[CrossRef]
117. Ramírez, R. Value Co-Production: Intellectual Origins and Implications for Practice and Research.
Strateg. Manag. J. 1999, 20, 49–65.
118. Payne, A.F.; Storbacka, K.; Frow, P. Managing the Co-Creation of Value. J. Acad. Mark. Sci. 2008, 36, 83–96.
[CrossRef]
119. Lessig, L. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy; Penguin Press: New York, NY,
USA, 2008.
120. Ménard, C.; Gibbons, R.; Roberts, J. Hybrid Modes of Organization, Alliances, Joint Ventures, Networks, and
Other “Strange” Animals; Handbook of Organizational Economics, Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ,
USA, 2011.
214
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
121. Haigh, N.; Hoffman, A.J. Hybrid organizations: The next chapter of sustainable business. Org. Dyn. 2012, 41,
126–134. [CrossRef]
122. Santos, F. A Positive Theory of Social Entrepreneurship. J. Bus. Ethics 2012, 111, 335–351. [CrossRef]
123. Pache, A.-C.; Santos, F. Inside the hybrid organization: Selective coupling as a response to competing
institutional logics. Acad. Manag. J. 2013, 56, 972–1001. [CrossRef]
124. Santos, F.M.; Pache, A.-C.; Birkholz, C. Making Hybrids Work: Aligning business models and organizational
design for social entreprises. Calif. Manag. Rev. 2015, 57, 36–58. [CrossRef]
125. Velamuri, V.K.; Neyer, A.K.; Möslein, K.M. Hybrid Value Creation, Understanding the Value
Creating Attributes, MKWI 2010–Integration von Produkt und Dienstleistung–Hybride Wertschöpfung.
2003. Available online: http://webdoc.sub.gwdg.de/univerlag/ 2010/mkwi/03_ anwendungen/
integration_ von_produkt_und_dienstleistung_-_ hybride_wertschoepfung/01_hybrid_value_creation.pdf
(accessed on 19 February 2016).
126. Khare, A.; Huang, Y.; Doan, H.; Kanwal, M.S. A Fresh Graduate’s Guide to Software Development Tools and
Technologies. Available online: http://www.comp.nus.edu.sg/~seer/book/2e/Ch06.%20Scalability.pdf
(accessed on 19 February 2016).
127. Menascé, D.A.; Virgilio Almeida, A.F. Challenges in Scaling E-Business Sites. In Proceedings of the 2000
Computer Measurement Group Conference, Orlando, FL, USA, 10–15 December 2000.
128. Gunther, N.J. A general theory of computational scalability based on rational functions. 2008; arXiv:0808.1431.
Available online: http://arxiv.org/abs/0808.1431 (accessed on 25 August 2008).
129. Gunther, N.J. Guerrilla Capacity Planning: A Tactical Approach to Planning for Highly Scalable Applications and
Services, 1st ed.; Springer: Heidelberg, Germany, 2007.
130. Amit, R.; Zott, C. Value Creation in E-Business. Strateg. Manag. J. 2001, 22, 493–520. [CrossRef]
131. Rappa, M.A. The utility business model and the future of computing services. IBM Syst. J. 2004, 43, 32–42.
[CrossRef]
132. Bouwman, H.; MacInnes, I. Dynamic Business Model Framework for Value Webs. In Proceedings of the 39th
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS2006), Kauai, HI, USA, 4–7 January 2006.
133. Nielsen, C.; Morten, L. The Concept of Business Model Scalability. 2015. Available online: http://vbn.aau.dk/
files/208921589/BM_Scalability_WP.pdf (accessed on 30 December 2015).
134. Björkdahl, J.; Holmén, M. Business model innovation–the challenges ahead. Int. J. Prod. Dev. 2013, 18,
213–215.
135. Green, R. Scalable Business Model. 2014. Available online: http://www.briefing.com/ investor/
learning-center/general-concepts/scalable-business-models/ (accessed on 28 October 2014).
136. Information taken from. Available online: http://www.forbes.com/sites/martinzwilling/2013/09/06/
10-tips-for-building-the-most-scalable-startup/ (accessed on 19 February 2016).
137. WP3–E-Business Model Roadmap Deliverable 3.1 (Revised): “E-Factors Report Part 1: Overview, and
Current Trends on E-Business Models”, Task Leader: University of Jyväskylä (Finland). Available online:
http://www.wi1.uni-muenster.de/wi/studies/archive/izi/ss05/E-FACTORS_D3_1.pdf (accessed on 19
February 2016).
138. Blank, S.; Dorf, B. Podr˛ecznik Startupu, Budowa Wielkiej Firmy krok po Kroku; Helion: Gliwice, Poland, 2013.
139. Blank, S. Why the Lean Start-Up Changes Everything. Available online: https://hbr.org/2013/
05/ why-the-lean-start-up-changes-everything (accessed on 19 February 2016). (In Polish)
140. Stabryła, A. Generalne formuły post˛epowania badawczego w procesie projektowania. Zeszyty Naukowe
Małopolskiej Wy˙zszej Szkoły Ekonomicznej w Tarnowie 2012, 1, 167–180. (In Polish)
141. Jabłon´ ski, A.; Jabłon´ ski, M. System zarza˛dzania a atrybuty modeli biznesu. Probl. Jakos´ci. 2014, 4, 26–30.
142. Moore, G.E. Cramming more components onto integrated circuits. Electron. Maga. 1965, 38, 82–85. (In Polish).
[CrossRef]
143. Ragin, C.C. The comparative method. In Moving Beyond Qualitative and Quantitative Strategies; University of
California Press: Berkeley, CA, USA, 1987.
144. Rohwer, G. Qualitative comparative analysis: A discussion of interpretations. Eur. Sociol. Rev. 2010.
[CrossRef]
215
Sustainability 2016, 8, 194
145. Osterwalder, A.; Pigneur, Y.; Tucci, C.L. Clarifying business models: Origins, present, and future of the
concept. Commun. AIS 2005, 16, 1–25.
146. Osterwalder, A. The Business Model Ontology a Proposition in a Design Science Approach, Licencié
en Sciences Politiques de l’Université de Lausanne Diplômé postgrade en Informatique et Organisation
(DPIO)de l’Ecole des HEC de l’Université de Lausanne Pour l’obtention du grade de Docteur
en Informatique de Gestion. 2004. Available online: http://www.hec.unil.ch/aosterwa/PhD/
Osterwalder_PhD_BM_Ontology.pdf (accessed on 19 February 2016). (In Polish)
© 2016 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
216
sustainability
Article
The Effect of the Internal Side of Social
Responsibility on Firm Competitive Success
in the Business Services Industry
M. Isabel Sánchez-Hernández 1, Dolores Gallardo-Vázquez 2, Agnieszka Barcik 3
and Piotr Dziwi´ nski 4,*
1 Business Administration and Sociology Department, School of Economics, University of Extremadura,
Ave. Elvas s/n, Badajoz 06006, Spain; isanchez@unex.es
2 Financial Economics and Accountancy Department, School of Economics, University of Extremadura,
Ave. Elvas s/n, Badajoz 06006, Spain; dgallard@unex.es
3 Department of Management and Transport, University of Bielsko-Biała,Willowa 2,
Bielsko-Biala 43-309, Poland; abarcik@ath.bielsko.pl
4 Department of Law and Administration, The University of Da˛browa Górnicza, Cieplaka 1c,
D ˛ abrowa Górnicza 43-300, Poland
* Correspondence: pdziwinski@wsb.edu.pl; Tel.: +48-606-113-729
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 27 December 2015; Accepted: 14 February 2016; Published: 18 February 2016
Abstract: This work focuses on the internal side of social responsibility of organizations in a regional
context. Through a survey of 590 managers in classical business services (human-capital intensive)
and representative of the productive economy of the Region of Extremadura (Spain), an empirical
analysis is conducted. First, a factor analysis is conducted to explore the main dimensions of the
internal face of Social Responsibility and second, a structural equations model is developed to look
for a relationship with business competitiveness. Business performance and innovation are also
considered in the model. The main contribution of the article is the establishment of a set of indicators
that will help to build an ongoing and meaningful dialogue with employees improving their quality of
life at work that will also serve as important guidance for the increasing of the firm’s competitiveness
through responsible human resources practices. Some suggestions for a research agenda emerge from
this first attempt to approach the internal side of responsibility in business.
Keywords: human recources management (HRM); internal social responsibility (ISR); service sector;
social responsibility (SR)
1. Introduction
The rise of service economy has been the predominant pattern over the last few years [1–3].
We know a great deal about the organization and management of Social Responsibility (SR) and
the link with Human Resources Management (HRM), but comparatively little about how applicable
this is to the service sector. In this work, we identify the components of the internal side of Social
Responsibility in the services industry.
Freeman [4] gave a broad definition of stakeholders as any group or individual who can affect
or is affected by the achievement of the organization’s objectives. This author also highlights how
stakeholders are simply constituents within and outside the organization, who have a stake in an
organization’s functioning and outcomes. The well-known Stakeholder Theory offers an instrumental
value in providing a framework for guiding the actions of organizational members to ensure that the
relationships that contribute to their financial viability are managed responsibly [5,6]. Some authors
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179; doi:10.3390/su8020179 217 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179
refer to the moral claim on the actions of the firms to define the stakeholders [7] such as consumers,
employees, competitors, suppliers, government, as well as other actors in society. It is evident that the
firm responds to multiple stakeholders for different reasons and in various ways [8,9].
According to the Stakeholder Theory, it is generally recognized that Social Responsibility (SR) has
two dimensions: the external dimension and the internal one. On the one hand, the external dimension
of SR is reflected in a large relationship of organizations with their communities. Companies interact
with their external stakeholders when they provide business operations by guaranteeing economic
activity, tax revenues, investing in the local economic system, concluding contracts with the local
distributors, respecting human rights, and encouraging protection activities on environment by
considering environmental concerns in business operations. On the other hand, the understudied
internal side of SR has the emphasis on employees. Mason and Simmons [10] say that employees
expect SR values similar to other stakeholders, arguing that employees seek functional, economic,
psychological, and ethical benefits from their employing organizations. In this sense, if employers
provide challenging, stimulating and fulfilling work, some functional benefits will be obtained and it
will also be perceived as indicative of a socially responsible employer and a main driver of Internal
Social Responsibility (ISR) practices [11,12].
In general terms, SR has been considered to be “an organization’s obligation to maximize its
positive impact on stakeholders and to minimize its negative impact” [13]. However, the heterogeneity
of definitions has been highlighted by Matten and Moon [14], (p.405) when they said “SR is an umbrella
term overlapping with some, and being synonymous with other, conceptions of business-society
relation”. According to the renewed definition by the European Commission, SR is the responsibility
of enterprises for their impacts on society with reference to collaborate with stakeholders "to integrate
social, environmental and ethical concerns, respect for human rights and consumer concerns into their
business operations and their core strategy” [15] (p.7). Taking into account that classical organizational
boundaries have become obsolete because “what once was ‘outside’ the organization is now ‘inside’
and vice versa” [16] (p.449) we found in this fact a fundamental reason for the emergence of the internal
face of SR. Nowadays, the external side of SR and the internal one are more related than ever showing
higher interconnectivity as have been shown by Sánchez-Hernández and Grayson [17]. According to
this work, companies should discover the social and environmental potential of employees in order
to integrate their interests and skills into the overall SR efforts. This will be the way to internalize
a Social Responsible Strategy within the organization creating dynamic capabilities likely to lead to
competitive advantages. The interaction of Strategy and HRM issues [18] explains how employees
are important to a firm’s success. According to the Resource-Based Theory (RBT) of the firm, human
capital is a key factor explaining performance differences across firms [19]. In this respect, Crook [20]
has pointed out the importance of “specific” employees, referring to the best and brightest human
capital available in the labor market, to achieve high performance. Shoemaker [16] argued that treating
HRM and SR separately is an outdated approach because organizations develop towards open systems
where cooperative action is based on the willingness of employees to bring in and expand their talents
as part of communities of work.
Despite the huge academic literature devoted to SR, literature about ISR is surprisingly scarce
and empirical studies are inexistent as far as we know. However, the need for real improvement in
organizational capability for doing well, and also for doing well in respect to stakeholders, as a basis for
competitive strategy and competitive advantage, has received widespread attention in the academic
and professional management literature [21]. In addition, competitive advantage is increasingly
achieved through the mobilization of the accumulated know-how of individual employees to create
value through processes that are not easily imitable [22]. Consequently, ISR has to be analyzed for one
important reason: because employees are stakeholders able to create social value for the company
mediating between the company and the consumers.
Worried about the under-studied internal side of SR, this work focuses upon regional businesses
in Extremadura (Autonomous Region in the southwest of Spain) interacting with the local community
218
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179
by investing in the regional economic system, contracting with the local distributors, taking into
account environmental concerns (external side of SR) and also recruiting employees, guaranteeing
jobs, wages, training, and employees quality of life (the internal one).
The paper exposes what could be considered socially responsible management of human
resources, called sustainable HRM—what actions related to human capital any organization could
perform to state that employees’ management is sustainable. In previous work, the authors have
developed and empirically validated an SR scale in the regional context of study [23]. Now, we address
internal practices considered sustainable in academic management literature by isolating the internal
aspects of the general scale mentioned. For the definition of indicators that reflect these actions, we
have covered several areas. All of them include some determinants of pleasant working conditions,
and are oriented to the pursuit of social welfare [24–29].
There are many different areas that could be addressed. Thus, we start to refer to the actions
devoted to support the employment of people at risk of social exclusion [30,31] and, at the same time,
the fact that the company values the contribution of disabled people to the business world [32–34].
Moreover, the interest in the employee’s quality of life [29,35], the importance of payments of wages
above the industry average and the existence of pension plans [36,37], or the fact that employee
compensation will be related to their skills and results [38,39], are aspects that determine a responsible
management into the organization. We can add the standards of health and safety beyond the legal
minimum (because every company has to fulfill the law) [40], the commitment with the job creation [41]
and the training and development programs for employees [32,42]. In addition, it is important to
consider the conciliation of professional and personal lives [43,44] and the equal opportunities for
all employees [32,42,45–47]. In the line of social commitment, the participation of the organization in
social projects [48,49] and the organization of volunteer activities in collaboration with NGOs [49,50],
define new responsible actions in management.
Moreover, to be responsible, the organization must have dynamic mechanisms of dialogue with
employees. In this respect, Preuss and others [51] conclude after some case study analyses that
dialogue with employee representatives and trade unions could play an active role in SR and, in some
cases, even a pivotal one. While the company is doing SR actions, it must raise awareness and inform
employees on SR and the actions committed. Finally, the fact that the organization was an active
member of any association that promotes the implementation of SR, as could be the case of the United
Nations Global Compact for instance, is considered very important [52].
After this theoretical introduction, employees could be considered the center of any responsible
business. European firms pursue SR for concerns of stakeholders such as government, regulatory
bodies, customers or pressure groups. This is the external SR orientation. However, the aim of this
paper is to study the ISR of organizations. In this sense, we say that SR behavior and values should
also include internal aspects of management related to intra-organizational elements, organizational
capabilities and HRM. As follows, through a survey of managers, we first carry on a factor analysis
to explore the main dimensions of the ISR. Once the multidimensionality of this new construct is
empirically determined, interpreted, and understood, the empirical analysis continues by looking
for a relationship between ISR and business competitiveness. The work finishes with conclusions,
limitations of the study, and lines of research for the near future.
2. Method
2.1. Sample and Procedure
The information for this investigation was collected from business services managers in the
Autonomous Community of Extremadura, in southwestern Spain. The broad argument to choose
services in this work is that the match between HRM and SR strategy should be greater in services than
in manufacturing, highlighting the internal side of SR. According to Legge [53], services are competing
in the knowledge-based economy. Services are used to characterize high skilled people and high cost
219
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179
industry. In this context, it is likely to adopt HRM policies very well linked to SR strategy that treat
employees as an asset that enables the company to create added-value.
To justify the selected region, we have to say that, since 2010, a special plan for the promotion of SR
exists in the Region. The main pillars for building a responsible culture in the region are: The Law of SR
in Extremadura (15/2010 of 9 December) and the Decree (110/2013 of 2 July) for the establishment
of the Autonomous Council for the promotion of Social Responsibility of Extremadura, the Office
of Corporate Social Responsibility, and the Procedure for qualification and registration of socially
responsible companies. At this point, it is important to highlight that the special plan for the promotion
of SR in the Region is enhancing both the external and the internal side of SR. Table 1 presents the
study's technical data sheet.
Table 1. Technical data sheet.
Data Sheet
Geographical Scope Region of Extremadura (Spain)
Universe SMEs (Small and medium–sized enterprises) Business Services—Source:
Spain’s Central Enterprise Directory 2009
Method of information collection Phone contact
Emitted calls 14,580
Population 5332 contacted firms
Final sample 590 SMEs
Index of participation 11.07%
Measurement error 3.3%
Trust level 95% z = 1.96 p = q = 0.5
Sampling method Simple random
Average duration of the interview 14:35 (minutes:seconds)
Source: Own work.
The representative sample of regional business services comprised 590 SMEs (Small and
medium-sized enterprises) with their corresponding predetermined substitute firms to control the
non-response index. The objective universe was drawn from Spain’s Central Enterprise Directory
(SCED). Before beginning the study, we calibrated the representativeness of the sample of firms that
were to participate in the survey. To this end, weighting coefficients were established according to
the defined strata of the firms in the sample. Possible biases relative to the characteristics of the total
population of the Directory were checked for using statistical tests, comparing the structure of the
sample with the total population of the SCED. The results justified the validity of the sample for the
purposes of the study. A pilot test was also carried out in order to check that the survey would be
appropriately interpreted by the respondent. The administration of one ad hoc questionnaire was by
telephone interviews with business services managers. They were carried out using the Computer
Aided Telephone Interviewing (CATI) system. The participation index was 11.07%, corresponding to
the percentage of firms in which a valid interlocutor agreed to participate in the study. A total of 590
completed surveys were collected, which resulted in a response rate of 11.07%.
2.2. The Measurement Instrument
An ad hoc questionnaire was provided to inquire into the manager’s perceptions with responses
on a 10-point Likert scale. These responses went from “0: totally in disagreement” to “10: totally
in agreement” for the ISR items, and from “0: far below the competition” to “10: far above the
competition” for the items corresponding to the rest of the constructs. With this instrument, we
analyze the ISR as a first attempt to standardize it aligned with the “Guidance on Social Responsibility”
published for the International Organization for Standardization (ISO 26000) in 2010. The aim is to
assist companies to expand their responsible behavior from external actions to internal actions looking
for synergies and better performance. Thus, and according to previous work [23,32,54], the selected
indicators reflecting ISR actions are shown in Table 2 (from INTR1 to INTR18) selectively supported by
Turker [42], Agudo-Valiente et al. [45], Lu et al. [47] and Pérez et al. [46]. All indicators are considered
220
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179
internal activities related to ISR rather than external activities because, in these actions, we can observe
how employees mediate the relationship between the company and the society.
Table 2. Selected indicators about the internal dimension of social responsibility (SR).
Indicators
INTR1 We support the employment of people at risk of social exclusion
INTR2 We value the contribution of disabled people to the business world
INTR3 We are aware of the employees’ quality of life
INTR4 We pay wages above the industry average
INTR5 Employees compensation is related to their skills and their results
INTR6 We have standards of health and safety beyond the legal minimum
INTR7 We are committed to job creation (fellowships, creation of job opportunities, . . . )
INTR8 We foster our employees’ training and development
INTR9
We have human resource policies aimed at facilitating the conciliation of
employees’ professional and personal lives
INTR10 Employees' initiatives are taken seriously into account in management decisions
INTR11 Equal opportunities exist for all employees
INTR12 We participate in social projects to the community
INTR13
We encourage employees to participate in volunteer activities or in collaboration
with NGOs
INTR14 We have dynamic mechanisms of dialogue with employees
INTR15 We understand the importance of pension plans for employees
INTR16
We put into practice specific actions to raise awareness, to educate, and to inform
employees on the principles and actions related to SR
INTR17 The values related to SR are present in the vision and strategy of the firm
INTR18
We are active members of organizations, businesses, or professional association
or discussion groups that promote the implementation of SR
Source: Own work.
2.3. Factor Analysis
We observe that the selected indicators from the formulated domain of the internal side of SR
offered in Table 2 are measures or variables related to ISR. However, we wonder whether they could
be correlated with each other. In this case, it means that scores on each variable share information
contained in the others [55]. In general, factor analysis is a collection of methods to explain the
correlations among variables in terms of more fundamental elements called factors. Specifically,
and according to Jolliffe [56], the central idea of a principal component analysis is to reduce the
dimensionality of a data set in which there is a large number of interrelated variables, as is the case of
the first approximation to ISR shown in Table 2, while retaining as much as possible of the variation
present in the data set. This reduction is achieved by transforming the factors or principal components
to a new set of variables, which are uncorrelated, and which are ordered so that the first few retain
most of the variation present in all of the original variables. In addition, and considering that in
the factor analysis literature attention has been given to the issue of sample size, it is important to
remark that our sample (N = 590) is good enough. Taking into account the recommendations given
by Mundfrom et al. [57] even under the worst imaginable conditions of low communities and a larger
number of weakly determined factors, the very large required sample is over 500.
In this research, a factor analysis is used as a method for grouping the proposed variables related
to ISR according to a similar correlation pattern in order to discover the main factors for this construct.
An exploratory principal components factor analysis has allowed us to check the factorial composition
and validity. Thus, the initial 18-item instrument is performed to determine the structure of ISR. In our
221
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179
analysis, the value of the Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin measure of sampling adequacy (KMO = 0.873) and the
Bartlett sphericity test showed the existence of good correlations between the variables, so that we
could continue with the factorial analysis. The principal components factor analysis with varimax
rotation has produced five factors (Table 3).
We can observe how the eigenvalues and explained variance decline following the extraction of
the first factor. The factors extracted explained 61% of the total variance. To validate the exploratory
factor analysis, we took two random sub-samples. The validity of the factor analysis was confirmed
since the communities of the sub-samples were found to be similar in value to those of the initial
sample, the total explained variance was also similar, and the factor loadings after varimax rotation
were also close to the initial sample. While the values of Cronbach’s alpha is always lie between
0 and 1, the values calculated are all well in excess of the generally accepted rule-of-thumb lower
limit of 0.60 to be acceptable [58]. Cronbach’s alpha are good for the first three factors (α1 = 0.813;
α2 = 0.735; α3 = 0.711) and acceptable for the others (α4 = 0.64; α5 = 0.67). This result is good enough
because Cronbach's alpha has a positive relationship with the number of items in the scale and the
questionnaire contained only 18 items. The magnitude of the alpha values obtained is an evidence for
the internal consistency of the items forming the scales.
Table 3. Factor analysis.
Items Factor 1 Factor 2 Factor 3 Factor 4 Factor 5
INTR10 0.754 0.106 0.137 0.105 0.122
INTR14 0.747 ´0.010 0.248 0.081 0.171
INTR11 0.737 0.031 0.145 0.206 0.103
INTR9 0.659 0.153 0.100 0.136 –0.014
INTR8 0.656 0.276 0.031 0.278 0.074
INTR7 0.433 0.315 0.014 0.244 0.113
INTR18 0.059 0.785 0.126 0.045 0.049
INTR17 0.179 0.729 0.262 0.005 0.163
INTR16 0.160 0.708 0.230 0.176 0.003
INTR13 0.115 0.144 0835 0.086 0.015
INTR12 0.107 0.199 0.775 0.111 0.101
INTR15 0.266 0.231 0.599 0.052 ´0.008
INTR4 0.128 0.048 0.104 0.798 0.087
INTR5 0.288 ´0.031 0.136 0.708 0.085
INTR6 0.225 0.263 0.016 0.622 0.032
INTR1 0.068 0.122 0.093 0.018 0.836
INTR2 0.158 0.044 ´0.010 0.103 0.835
INTR3 0.461 0.052 0.042 0.362 0.483
% of standard deviation 31.133 10.315 7.640 6.228 5.687
Accumulated % 31.133 41.448 49.088 55.316 61.003
Notes: Determinant of the correlation matrix = 0.003; Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Index = 0.873; Barlett Test
(Chi-squared; sf) = 4335 (153); Signification level = 0.000. Source: Own work.
Another aspect of construct validity is the ability of factors to reflect the theoretical dimensions or
those argued by academic literature accurately. The individual factors contributing to the ISR model
and their theoretical explanation are the following:
‚ Factor one—Responsible HR (RHR) (31.1% of explained variance): This factor can be described and
interpreted as representing the responsiveness of HRM policies in respect to employees’ needs
and wants. This first factor is aligned with previous work in Internal Marketing [17,59] where
employees are considered clients, internal clients, and a very important stakeholder to attend. Job
creation, training, conciliation and equal opportunities and dynamic mechanisms of employees’
participation in management decisions fostering dialogue form part of this composite factor.
‚ Factor two—Responsible Organizational Culture (ROC) (10.3% of explained variance): Internalization
of SR principles and values into the vision and strategy of the business, relationship with
associations promoting SR, and the effort to communicate SR aspects to employees internally form
the essential elements of a culture of responsibility and form this second factor in the analysis.
222
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179
In this respect, some authors have highlighted the importance of the culture of responsibility as
the first step to become a responsible business [17,60].
‚ Factor three—HR and Social Issues (HRSI) (7.6% of explained variance): This factor can be best
described as representing the link between internal HRM practices and the external side of
SR in their relationship with the community in any effort for attending social issues. Being
aware of problems in society including pension plans for retirement and fostering corporate
volunteering are included in this factor and theoretically defended before in the same context [49]
and previously in others [61,62].
‚ Factor four—Responsible Compensation (RC) (6.2% of explained variance): Aligned to previous
studies [63,64], going beyond the legal minimum and beyond the average in the sector in human
resources tools such as wages, health and safety and linking employees’ compensation to their
performance, form the essential elements of this factor.
‚ Factor five—Employees Quality of Life (EQL) (5.6% of explained variance): The essential element
of this final factor forming ISR, also previously analyzed [29], is the aim to improve employees’
quality of life including the disabled and people in risk of social exclusion.
These five factors were perceived as ISR dimensions for the purposes of our study, and their
compatibility with the following step in this research is indicative of the validity of the study.
In addition, the requirement of discriminant validity to demonstrate that any indicator should correlate
more highly with another construct than with the construct it intends to measure [65] is also satisfactory
in all factors in the analysis. Once the five dimensions have been found and described, the path analysis
to test the relationship between ISR and competitive success is carried out in the following session.
2.4. Path Analysis
Structural equations modeling (SEM) has been used, considering it is very suitable for our research
interests, because the construct under study, ISR, is relatively new and the theoretical model and their
measures are not well formed [66]. According to literature review, when companies are involved in SR
activities, the internal dimension determines relations with their internal stakeholders, especially their
employees, and higher competitive success could be expected. Business performance and innovation
have also been considered in the developed structural model. The relationship between performance
and competitive success has been noted in business strategy fieldwork by Porter [67,68]) and other
authors [69,70], and previous work has demonstrated the mediation role of innovation between SR and
competitive success [32]. Innovation that is intrinsically about identifying and using opportunities to
create new products, services, or work practices [71] is also identified in the model as a mediator variable
when considering ISR because it is theoretically and widely accepted that improvements to HRM have
a positive impact on innovation [72,73]. According to Cano and Cano [74], certain HR practices such
as goal recognition or reward for achievement, have a positive effect on innovation performance in the
company. In fact, these HR improvements promote the ability to innovate because they first improve
the ability to deal with complexity [75]. In addition, academic literature on HRM has demonstrated how
better HR practices are also linked to firm performance [76]. Finally, the link of these previous variables to
competitive success is the soul of the Resource-Based Theory of the firm [5,6] previously exposed. The focus
of management on sustainable HRM is the key to enhance employee commitment and satisfaction, which,
in turn, increases the service innovation and performance, and will ultimately generate better overall
competitive success [77]. The model shown in Figure 1 includes four related latent variables that make up
the proposed relationships defined in the following hypotheses.
Hypothesis 1—There is a direct and positive relationship between the ISR and business performance.
Hypothesis 2—There is a direct and positive relationship between business performance and
competitive success.
Hypothesis 3—There is a direct and positive relationship between the ISR and innovation.
Hypothesis 4—There is a direct and positive relationship between innovation and competitive success.
223
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179
􀀃
PERFORMA
INNOVAT
COMPETI
SUCCE
RH
RO
SP
C
EQ
H H
H H
IS
Figure 1. The structural model. Source: own work.
To measure ISR, we have considered the five dimensions found in the previous factor analysis
(with the sort names RHR, ROC, HRSI, RC and EQL). Consequently, ISR has been defined as a second
order construct. Indicators for each dependent variable are shown in Table 4.
Table 4. Original Indicators for performance, innovation and competitive success.
Indicators for Performance (PER), Innovation (INV) and Competitive Success (COM)
PER1 Level of before-tax profits
PER2 Level of profitability
PER3 Increase in sales
PER4 Profit margin
PER5 Market share for our products and/or services
PER6 Level of customer satisfaction and loyalty
PER7 Satisfaction and retention of the best employees
PER8 Market positioning, image, and reputation
INV1 We try to carry out R&D projects
INV2 We have put new products or services on the market
INV3 We have introduced new practices to foster entry into new national markets
INV4 We have introduced new practices to foster entry into new international markets
INV5 We are aware of the importance of working as a network, and we have created new alliances
or associations
INV6 We have put into place improvements in our production and/or distribution process or techniques
INV7 We have intensified our information and communication technologies
INV8 We have increased our presence on the Internet
INV9 We have initiated changes in the marketing area (design, packaging, prices, . . . )
INV10 Our firm has introduced new methods with a view to satisfying the norms of certification
INV11 We have implemented internal or external employee training in order to improve knowledge and
creativity within the firm
INV12 We have implemented new managerial practices related to the organization of work and the
corporate structure
INV13 We have introduced standards of production or customer management that take social and
environmental aspects into account
COM1 Quality in our human resource management
COM2 The levels of training and empowerment of our personnel
COM3 The leadership capabilities of our managers
COM4 Our capabilities in the field of marketing
COM5 Quality of our products and services
COM6 The levels of organizational and administrative management quality
COM7 Technological resources and information systems
COM8 Transparency of our financial management
COM9 The cohesion of our corporate values and culture
COM10 Market knowledge, know-how, and accumulated experience
Source: Own work.
224
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179
To measure performance, innovation and competitive success, we have considered scales
previously used by Gallardo-Vázquez and Sánchez-Hernández [32]. Performance is considered
a reflective construct with eight indicators (from PER1 to PER8) as well as innovation with thirteen
indicators (from INV1 to INV13) and competitive success with ten indicators (from COM1 to COM10).
At this point, it is important to distinguish performance from competitive success in the model.
Performance considers firm results going beyond short-term financial performance and pursuing
sustainable development. Instead, competitive success considers aspects of competition. Firms have
competitive success when they are able to attain favorable positions in the market and obtain superior
results, while avoiding the need to have recourse to an extremely poor retribution of the factors of
production. Consequently, competitive success implies getting better positions than your competitors
because of “something more” than performance.
For the measurement of performance, this construct was taken to be multi-dimensional in
accordance with the literature and basing the dimensions considered on a combination of the
contribution of Wiklund and Shepherd [78] with that of Pelham and Wilson [79] to include growth in
market share and sales. In addition, we consider a very broad conception of innovation. The construct
is conceived as the adoption of new idea or practice capable of leading to new products or services [80]
to enter new markets [81] or to the generation of new organizational or administrative processes [82].
With respect to the last dependent variable in the model, a firm was taken to have competitive
success when it is able to attain a favorable position in the market and obtain superior results,
while avoiding the need to have recourse to an extremely poor retribution of the factors of
production. To measure competitive success, we used indicators previously considered in academic
literature [83,84].
Once the model and related constructs have been described, the first statistical step was to analyze
whether the theoretical concepts where properly measured by the observed indicators. This analysis
was carried out for the two attributes validity (measuring what one really wanted to measure) and
reliability (whether the process is stable and consistent). To this end, we calculate the individual item
reliability, the internal consistency or reliability of the scales, the average variances extracted (AVE),
and the discriminant validity. Results are shown in Table 5.
Table 5. Results from the measurement model.
Constructs Reliable
Indicators Loadings (λ) AVE Crombach’s
Alpha
Composite
Reliability
ISR
RHR 0.671
0.5167 0.6943 0.8097
ROC 0.728
RC 0.671
EQL 0.675
Performance
D6 0.892
D7 0.906 0.7514 0.8327 0.9004
D8 0.798
Innovation
INV5 0.717
0.5336 0.8747 0.9012
INV6 0.678
INV7 0.768
INV8 0.698
INV9 0.721
INV11 0.772
INV12 0.785
INV13 0.695
225
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179
Table 5. Cont.
Constructs Reliable
Indicators Loadings (λ) AVE Crombach’s
Alpha
Composite
Reliability
Competitive
Success
COM1 0.761
0.5768 0.8530 0.8909
COM2 0.784
COM3 0.768
COM5 0.800
COM6 0.744
COM8 0.708
Source: Own work.
The most remarkable result in this step is the confirmation of four of the five dimensions found in
ISR. The dimension linking HRM and Social Issues, factor three, has been removed from the model,
as we have kept only factor loadings greater than 0.67 on ISR construct, which implies more shared
variance between ISR and its four items than error variance [85].
The second step of the analysis of the structural model consisted of the estimation of the assumed
linear relationships among exogenous and endogenous latent constructs. The correlations among
study variables are shown in Table 6. Correlations indicate that the managers’ perceptions regarding
the ISR of their company were positively related to competitive success, innovation and performance,
providing preliminary support for hypotheses.
Table 6. Inter-correlations matrix.
Variable 1 2 3 4
1. ISR 1
2. Innovation 0.505 1
3. Performance 0.242 0.161 1
4. Competitive Success 0.394 0.312 0.575 1
Source: Own work.
The hypotheses have been tested by examining the magnitude of the standardized parameters
estimated between constructs with the corresponding t-values that indicate the level of significance.
We employ the bootstrap routine [66], a non-parametric re-sampling technique that offers the t-statistic
values. All hypotheses were verified as it is shown in Table 7.
Table 7. Hypotheses testing.
HYPOTHESIS/Structural Relation
A  B
Original Path
Coefficients (β)
Mean of Sub-Sample
Path Coefficients Standard Error t-Value
H1: ISR Performance 0.2425 0.2453 0.0729 3.32 ***
H2: Performance  Competitive Success 0.5394 0.5504 0.0530 10.17 ***
H3: ISR Innovation 0.5054 0.5133 0.0550 9.16 ***
H4: Innovation  Competitive Success 0.2249 0.2242 0.0542 4.14 ***
Source: Own work.
Finally, to measure the relevance of the dependent construct’s prediction, PLS (Partial Least
Squares) uses the Q2 index from Stone–Geisser as a criterion, which is calculated based on the
redundancies that result from the product of communities (λ2) with the AVE indicator and is also
cross-validated. According to Chin [86], the Stone–Geisser criterion Q2 values have been obtained from
running a blindfolding procedure and range above the threshold level of zero (0.48 for performance;
0.40 for innovation; 0.45 for competitive success), indicating that the exogenous constructs have
predictive relevance for the endogenous construct under consideration.
226
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179
3. Results and Discussion
While acknowledging that the regional context of the study puts limits on the generalization of our
findings, we nonetheless see a number of interesting conclusions. The main contribution of the article
is the establishment of a set of indicators that define ISR as a result of a dynamic process that provides
information about a firm's actions in responsible HRM. This article argues in favor of a stronger
focus upon the management of ISR policies and practices in enterprises. Our results show the main
factors determining the ISR structure as they have been perceived by a big sample of services business
managers in the region under study. The obtained empirical evidence is a contribution to the SR
research where there is a lack in studies devoted to the internal side. Therefore, this study contributes
to the generation of knowledge on internal responsible behavior of companies. As demonstrated,
ISR in service business, which is more influenced by human resources practices, is defined by five
well-delimited dimensions such as: responsible human resources practices; organizational culture
of responsibility; social projects promotion; significant compensation policies and employee quality
of life. A point of interest that needs to be highlighted is the important role that HRM could play
in the SR strategy of any business, an aspect that has been analyzed with the developed structural
equation model.
It has been demonstrated empirically that ISR has an effect on increasing the firm’s
competitiveness. The conceptual model has been tested empirically confirming the four hypotheses
H1, H2, H3 and H4. Consequently, the model has been validated where innovation and performance
have the role of mediator variables between ISR and competitive success in accordance with previous
work in general SR [23,32], where ISR was not isolated from the holistic construct of firm responsibility.
4. Conclusions
Although an abundance of research exists on the general topic of SR, little has been run
toward identifying, or perhaps more importantly, measuring its internal aspects in business services.
This investigation provides ample foundation for further research on this topic and contributes to a
better appreciation and understanding of the role of responsible HRM practices.
To conclude, it should be noted that results from the analysis should be interpreted for SMEs,
overcoming the limitations coming from the regional context of study and also from the selection of
the sample limited to the service sector, and limited to a single Spanish Autonomous Community.
Consequently, our results are not directly extrapolated to other environments that differed greatly in
their defining variables. However, since the predominance of business services and the predominance
of SMEs are characteristic for the whole Spanish territory, and even the whole European Union, we can
accept the results satisfactorily. We believe that our study represents a substantial contribution to the
knowledge of ISR, but, in the near future, qualitative and quantitative research should be done on the
topic. Managers have to be aware that one of the most important stakeholders the company has is the
employee. Employees have to be considered an internal client [59,87] and, consequently, SR should
start inside the company. In fact, we question whether there is sufficient focus upon investment in
employees, which could be regarded as an important driver of external SR practice [88].
Some suggestions for a research agenda emerge from this attempt to approach the internal side of
responsibility in business. First, new studies in the same direction but in other sectors and regions
have to be addressed, and second, and related to SR and internal management, we suggest an analysis
of the theoretical and hypothetical relationship between the internal and the external side of SR in
order to determine the direct effect in external SR fostered by responsible HR policies internally. In line
with other authors [59,89], we remark on the importance of internal marketing as a way to sell the
responsible company culture internally to employees to somehow help external SR to develop at the
same time that companies improve their competitive success. The more important the concept and
practice of ISR becomes, the more likely the companies will improve their competitive advantage.
It should be taken as an important opportunity for the responsible reinvention of management.
227
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179
In conclusion, ISR and HRM are interrelated concepts influencing the business competitive success,
and their effectiveness depends on responsible practices inside the spheres of the company.
Acknowledgments: Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful to all the managers in business services who
participated in the survey and contributed to the paper.
Author Contributions: Author Contributions: M. Isabel Sánchez-Hernandez designed the research, analyzed
the data and wrote the manuscript, Dolores Gallardo-Vázquez collected data and performed research, Agnieszka
Barcik analyzed the data and revised the research and paper, and Piotr Dziwi´ nski analyzed the data, revised the
research and corrected the final version of manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Peneder, M.; Kaniovski, S.; Dachs, B. What follows tertiarisation? Structural change and the role of
knowledge-based services. Serv. Ind. J. 2003, 23, 47–66. [CrossRef]
2. Ehret, M.; Wirtz, J. Division of labor between firms: Business services, non-ownership-value and the rise of
the service economy. Serv. Sci. 2010, 2, 136–145. [CrossRef]
3. Buera, F.J.; Kaboski, J.P. Scale and the origins of structural change. J. Econ. Theory 2012, 147, 684–712.
[CrossRef]
4. Freeman, R.E. Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach, 1st ed.; Harpercollins College Div., Pitman Series:
Marshfield, MA, USA, 1994.
5. Donaldson, T.; Preston, L. The Stakeholder Theory of the Corporation: Concepts, Evidence, and Implications.
Acad. Manag. Rev. 1995, 1, 65–91.
6. Freeman, R.E.; Harrison, J.E.;Wicks, A.C. Managing for Stakeholders: Survival, Reputation, and Success; Yale
University Press: New Haven, CT, USA, 2007.
7. Kaler, J. Evaluating stakeholder theory. J. Bus. Eth. 2006, 69, 249–268. [CrossRef]
8. Berrone, P.; Surroca, J.; Tribo, J.A. Corporate ethical identity as a determinant of firm performance: A test of
the mediating role of stakeholder satisfaction. J. Bus. Eth. 2007, 76, 35–53. [CrossRef]
9. Verbeke, A.; Tung, V. The Future of Stakeholder Management Theory: A Temporal Perspective. J. Bus. Eth.
2013, 112, 529–543. [CrossRef]
10. Mason, C.; Simmons, J. Embedding Corporate Social Responsibility in Corporate Governance: A Stakeholder
Systems Approach. J. Bus. Eth. 2013, 119, 77–86. [CrossRef]
11. Mont, O.; Leire, C. Socially responsible purchasing in supply chains: Drivers and barriers in Sweden.
Soc. Responsib. J. 2009, 5, 389–407. [CrossRef]
12. Barcik, A.; Dziwi´ nski, P. Relations with employees in CSR strategies at Polish enterprises with regard to
compliance mechanism. Responsib. Sustain. 2015, 3, 13–26.
13. Ferrell, O.C.; Fraedrich, J.; Ferrell, L. Business Ethics: Ethical Decision Making and Cases; Houghton Mifflin:
Boston, MA, USA, 2008.
14. Matten, D.; Moon, M. “Implicit” and “explicit” CSR: A conceptual framework for a comparative
understanding of Corporate Social Responsibility. Acad. Manag. Rev. 2008, 33, 404–424. [CrossRef]
15. Commission of the European Communities, COM. Communication from the Commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the
Regions. Available online: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52011DC0681
(accessed on 17 February 2016).
16. Schoemaker, M.; Nijhof, A.; Jonker, J. Human value management. The influence of the contemporary
developments of corporate social responsibility and social capital on HRM. Manag. Rev. 2006, 17, 448–465.
17. Sánchez-Hernández, M.I.; Grayson, D. Internal marketing for engaging employees on the corporate
responsibility journey. Intang. Cap. 2012, 8, 275–307. [CrossRef]
18. Barney, J. Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. J. Manag. 1991, 17, 99–120. [CrossRef]
19. Acedo, F.J.; Barroso, C.; Galán, J.L. The resource-based theory: Dissemination and main trends.
Strateg. Manag. J. 2006, 27, 621–636. [CrossRef]
20. Crook, T.R.; Todd, S.Y.; Combs, J.G.; Woehr, D.J.; Ketchen, D.J., Jr. Does human capital matter? A
meta-analysis of the relationship between human capital and firm performance. J. Appl. Psychol. 2011, 96,
443–456. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
228
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179
21. Porter, M.E.; Kramer, M.R. The link between competitive advantage and corporate social responsibility.
Harv. Bus. Rev. 2006, 84, 78–92. [PubMed]
22. Varey, R.J. Internal marketing: A review and some interdisciplinary research challenges. Int. J. Serv.
Ind. Manag. 1995, 6, 40–63. [CrossRef]
23. Gallardo-Vázquez, D.; Sánchez-Hernández, M.I. Measuring Corporate Social Responsibility for competitive
success at a regional level. J. Clean. Prod. 2014, 72, 14–22. [CrossRef]
24. Carroll, A. A three-dimensional conceptual model of corporate performance. Acad. Manag. Rev. 1979, 4,
497–505.
25. Aupperle, K.; Carroll, A.B.; Hatfield, J. An empirical examination of the relationship between corporate
social responsibility and profitability. Acad. Manag. J. 1985, 28, 446–463. [CrossRef]
26. Wood, D.J.; Jones, R.E. Stakeholder mismatching: A theoretical problem in empirical research on corporate
social performance. Int. J. Organ. Anal. 1995, 3, 229–267. [CrossRef]
27. Quazi, A.M.; O'Brien, D. An empirical test of a cross-national model of corporate social responsibility.
J. Bus. Eth. 2000, 25, 33–51. [CrossRef]
28. Maignan, I.; Ferrell, O.C. Measuring Corporate Citizenship in Two Countries: The Case of the United States
and France. J. Bus. Eth. 2000, 23, 283–297. [CrossRef]
29. Sánchez-Hernández, M.I.; García-Míguelez, M.P. Improving Employees Quality of Life. In Best Practices in
Marketing and Their Impact on Quality of Life; Alves, H., Vázquez, J.L., Eds.; Springer Dordrecht Heidelberg:
New York, NY, USA; London, UK, 2013; pp. 241–254.
30. Zinn, J.O. Introduction: Risk, social inclusion and the life course. Soc. Policy Soc. 2013, 12, 253–264. [CrossRef]
31. Hayman, L.W.; McIntyre, R.B.; Abbey, A. The bad taste of social ostracism: The effects of exclusion on the
eating behaviors of African-American women. Psychol. Health 2014, 3, 1–16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Gallardo-Vázquez, D.; Sánchez-Hernández, M.I. Corporate Social Responsibility in Extremadura; Fundación
Obra Social La Caixa: Badajoz, Spain, 2012. (In Spanish)
33. Bruyére, S.; Filiberto, D. The green economy and job creation: Inclusion of people with disabilities in the
USA. Int. J. Green Econ. 2013, 7, 257–275. [CrossRef]
34. Kulkarni, M.; Rodrigues, C. Engagerment with disability: Analysis of annual reports of Indian organizations.
Int. J. Human Resour. Manag. 2014, 25, 1547–1566. [CrossRef]
35. Cullinane, S.J.; Bosak, J.; Flood, P.C.; Demerouti, E. Job design under lean manufacturing and the quality of
working life: A job demands and resources perspective. Int. J. Human Resour. Manag. 2014, 25, 2996–3015.
[CrossRef]
36. Amstrong, M. Amstrong’s Handbook of Reward Management Practice. In Improving Performance through
Reward, 4th ed.; Kogan Page: London, UK, 2012.
37. Esping-Andersen, G. The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism; JohnWiley & Sons: Chichester, UK, 2013.
38. Cohen, E. CSR for HR: A Necessary Partnership for Advancing Responsible Business Practices; Greenleaf Publishing
Limited: Sheffield, UK, 2010.
39. Long, C.S.; Perumal, P. Examining the impact of human resource management practices on employees’
turnover intention. Int. J. Bus. Soc. 2014, 15, 111–126.
40. Lozano, R.; Huisingh, D. Inter-linking issues and dimensions in sustainability reporting. J. Clean. Prod. 2011,
19, 99–107. [CrossRef]
41. Bischoff, C.;Wood, G. Micro and small enterprises and employment creation: A case study of manufacturing
micro and small enterprises in South Africa. Dev. South. Afr. 2013, 30, 564–579. [CrossRef]
42. Turker, D. Measuring Corporate Social Responsibility: A Scale Development Study. J. Bus. Eth. 2009, 85,
411–427. [CrossRef]
43. Vázquez-Carrasco, R.; López-Pérez, M.E.; Centeno, E. A qualitative approach to the challengues for women
in management: Are they really starting in the 21st century? Qual. Quant. 2012, 46, 1337–1357. [CrossRef]
44. Tato-Jiménez, J.L.; Bañegil-Palacios, T.M. Effects of formal and informal practices of reconciling work and
life on the performance of Spanish listed companies. Res. J. Bus. Manag. 2015, 9, 391–403. [CrossRef]
45. Agudo-Valiente, J.M.; Garcés-Ayerbe, C.; Salvador-Figueras, M. Social responsibility practices and evaluation
of corporate social performance. J. Cleaner Prod. 2012, 35, 25–38. [CrossRef]
46. Pérez, A.; Martínez, P. Rodríguez del Bosque, I. The development of a stakeholder-based scale for measuring
corporate social responsibility in the banking industry. Serv. Bus. 2012, 7, 459–481. [CrossRef]
229
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179
47. Lu, R.X.A.; Lee, P.K.C.; Cheng, T.C. Socially responsible supplier development: Construct development and
measurement validation. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 2012, 140, 160–167. [CrossRef]
48. Hillman, A.J.; Keim, G.D. Shareholder value, stakeholder management, and social issues: What's the bottom
line? Strateg. Manag. J. 2001, 22, 125–139. [CrossRef]
49. Sanchez-Hernandez, M.I.; Gallardo-Vázquez, D. Approaching corporate volunteering in Spain. Corpor. Gov.
2013, 13, 397–411. [CrossRef]
50. Knutsen, W.L.; Chan, Y. The Phenomenon of Staff Volunteering: How Far Can You Stretch the Psychological
Contract in a Nonprofit Organization? VOLUNTAS Int. J. Volunt. Nonprofit Organ. 2015, 26, 1–22. [CrossRef]
51. Preuss, L.; Haunschild, A.; Matten, D. The rise of CSR: Implications for HRM and employee representation.
Int. J. Hum. Resour. Manag. 2009, 20, 953–973. [CrossRef]
52. Cetindamar, D. Corporate social responsibility practices and environmentally responsible behavior: The
case of the United Nations Global Compact. J. Bus. Eth. 2007, 76, 163–176. [CrossRef]
53. Legge, K. Human Resource Management: Rhetorics and Realities. MacMillan Press: London, UK, 1995.
54. Gallardo-Vázquez, D.; Sánchez-Hernández, M.I. Structural analysis of the strategic orientation to
environmental protection in SME's. BQR—Bus. Res. Q. 2014, 17, 115–128. [CrossRef]
55. Cudeck, R. Exploratory Factor Analysis. In Handbook of Applied Multivariate Statistics and Mathematical
Modeling; Tinsley, H., Brown, S., Eds.; Academic Press: San Diego, CA, USA, 2000; pp. 265–296.
56. Jolliffe, I. Principal Component Analysis; JohnWiley & Sons: Chichester, UK, 2005.
57. Mundfrom, D.J.; Shaw, D.G.; Ke, T.L. Minimum sample size recommendations for conducting factor analyses.
Int. J. Test. 2005, 5, 159–168. [CrossRef]
58. Nunnally, J.C.; Bernstein, I.H. Psychometric Theory, 3rd ed.; McGraw Hill: New York, NY, USA, 1994.
59. Sánchez-Hernández, M.I.; Miranda, F.J. Linking internal market orientation and new service performance.
Eur. J. Innov. Manag. 2011, 14, 207–226. [CrossRef]
60. Pohl, M. Corporate Culture and CSR-How They Interrelate and Consequences for Successful Implementation.
In The ICCA Handbook on Corporate Social Responsibility; Hennigfeld, J., Pohl, M., Tolhurst, N., Eds.; John
Wiley & Sons: Chichester, UK, 2006.
61. Muthuri, J.N.; Matten, D.; Moon, J. Employee volunteering and social capital: Contributions to corporate
social responsibility. Br. J. Manag. 2009, 20, 75–89. [CrossRef]
62. Kim, H.R.; Lee, M.; Lee, H.T.; Kim, N.M. Corporate social responsibility and employee–company
identification. J. Bus. Eth. 2010, 95, 557–569. [CrossRef]
63. Mahoney, L.S.; Thorne, L. Corporate social responsibility and long-term compensation: Evidence from
Canada. J. Bus. Eth. 2005, 57, 241–253. [CrossRef]
64. Collier, J.; Esteban, R. Corporate social responsibility and employee commitment. Bus. Eth. A Eur. Rev. 2007,
16, 19–33. [CrossRef]
65. Barclay, D.; Higgins, C.; Thompson, R. The partial least squares (PLS) approach to causal modeling: Personal
computer adoption and use as an illustration. Technol. Stud. 1995, 2, 285–309.
66. Chin, W. Issues and Opinion on Structural Equation Modelling. MIS Q. 1998, 2, vii–xv.
67. Porter, M.E. Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors; The Free Press: New York,
NY, USA, 1980.
68. Porter, M.E. Towards a dynamic theory of strategy. Strateg. Manag. J. 1991, 12, 95–117. [CrossRef]
69. Spanos, Y.E.; Lioukas, S. An Examination into the Causal Logic of Rent Generation: Contrasting Porter’s
Competitive Strategy Framework and the Resource Based Perspective. Strateg. Manag. J. 2001, 22, 907–934.
[CrossRef]
70. Wagner, M.; Schaltegger, S. Introduction: How Does Sustainability Performance Relate to Business
Competitiveness? Greener Manag. Int. 2003, 44, 5–16. [CrossRef]
71. Van de Ven, A.H. Central problems in the management of innovation. Manag. Sci. 1986, 32, 590–660.
[CrossRef]
72. Sánchez-Hernández, M.I.; Gallardo-Vazquez, D.; Dziwi´ nski, P.; Barcik, A. Innovation through corporate
social responsibility—Insights from Spain and Poland. In Handbook of Research on Internationalization of
Entrepreneurial Innovation in the Global Economy; IGI Global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2015; pp. 313–328.
73. Subramaniam, M.; Youndt, M.A. The influence of intellectual capital on the types of innovative capabilities.
Acad. Manag. J. 2005, 48, 450–463. [CrossRef]
230
Sustainability 2016, 8, 179
74. Cano, C.P.; Cano, P.Q. Human resources management and its impact on innovation performance in
companies. Int. J. Technol. Manag. 2006, 35, 11–28. [CrossRef]
75. Lund Vinding, A. Absorptive capacity and innovative performance: A human capital approach. Econ. Innov.
New Technol. 2006, 15, 507–517. [CrossRef]
76. Mavondo, F.T.; Chimhanzi, J.; Stewart, J. Learning orientation and market orientation: Relationship with
innovation, human resource practices and performance. Eur. J. Mark. 2005, 39, 1235–1263. [CrossRef]
77. Little, M.M.; Dean, A.M. Links between service climate, employee commitment and employees’ service
quality capability. Manag. Serv. Qual. Int. J. 2006, 16, 460–476. [CrossRef]
78. Wiklund, J.; Shepperd, D. Knowledge-based resources, entrepreneurial orientation and the performance of
small and medium-sized businesses. Strateg. Manag. J. 2003, 24, 1307–1314. [CrossRef]
79. Pelham, A.; Wilson, D. A longitudinal study of the impact of market structure, firm structure, strategy, and
market orientation culture on dimensions of small-firm performance. Am. Mark. Assoc. 1996, 24, 27–43.
[CrossRef]
80. Yalcinkaya, G.; Calantone, R.J.; Griffith, D.A. An examination of exploration and exploitation capabilities:
Implications for product innovation and market performance. J. Int. Mark. 2007, 15, 63–93. [CrossRef]
81. Medrano-Sáez, N.; Olarte-Pascual, M.C. Marketing Innovation as an Opportunity in a Situation of
Uncertainty: The Spanish Case, 327–341. In Soft Computing in Management and Business Economics; Springer:
Berlin Heidelberg, Germany, 2012.
82. Carmona-Lavado, A.; Cuevas-Rodríguez, G.; Cabello-Medina, C. Social and organizational capital: Building
the context for innovation. Ind. Mark. Manag. 2010, 39, 681–690. [CrossRef]
83. Hughes, M.; Ireland, R.D.; Morgan, R.E. Stimulating dynamic value: Social capital and business incubation
as a pathway to competitive success. Long Range Plan. 2007, 40, 154–177. [CrossRef]
84. Abraham, S.C. Strategic Planning: A Practical Guide for Competitive Success; Emerald Group Publishing:
Bingley, UK, 2012.
85. Carmines, E.G.; Richard, A.Z. Reliability and Validity Assessment; Sage Publications: Beverly Hills, CA,
USA, 1979.
86. Chin, W.W. Issues and opinion on structural equation modeling. MIS Q. 1988, 22, vii–xvi.
87. Ahmed, P.K.; Rafiq, M. Internal Marketing—Tools and Concepts for Customer-Focused Management;
Butterworth-Heinemann Publications: Oxford, UK, 2002.
88. Bansal, H.S.; Mendelson, M.B.; Sharma, B. The impact of internal marketing activities on external marketing
outcomes. J. Qual. Manag. 2001, 6, 61–76. [CrossRef]
89. Ariza-Montes, J.A.; Muniz, R.N.M.; Leal-Rodríguez, A.L.; Leal-Millán, A.G. Workplace bullying among
managers: A multifactorial perspective and understanding. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11,
2657–2682. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2016 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
231
sustainability
Article
Automobile Industry Strategic Alliance Partner
Selection: The Application of a Hybrid DEA and
Grey Theory Model
Chia-NanWang 1, Xuan-Tho Nguyen 1,* and Yen-Hui Wang 2
1 Department of Industrial Engineering and Management, National Kaohsiung University of Applied
Sciences, No. 415 Chien Kung Road, Sanmin District, Kaohsiung City 80778, Taiwan;
cn.wang@cc.kuas.edu.tw
2 Department of Information Management, Chihlee University of Technology, New Taipei City 22050, Taiwan;
ttxyhw@mail.chihlee.edu.tw
* Correspondence: nguyenhanam188@gmail.com; Tel.: +886-970-456-070
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 21 December 2015; Accepted: 6 February 2016; Published: 17 February 2016
Abstract: Finding the right strategic alliance partner is a critical success factor for many enterprises.
Therefore, the purpose of this study is to propose an effective approach based on grey theory and data
envelopment analysis (DEA) for selecting better partners for alliance. This study used grey forecasting
to predict future business performances and used DEA for the partner selection of alliances. This
research was implemented with realistic public data in four consecutive financial years (2009–2012) of
the world’s 20 biggest automobile enterprises. Nissan Motor Co., Ltd was set to be the target decision
making unit (DMU). The empirical results showed that, among 19 candidate DMUs, Renault (DMU10)
and Daimler (DMU11) were the two feasible beneficial alliance partners for Nissan. Although this
research is specifically applied to the automobile industry, the proposed method could also be applied
to other manufacturing industries.
Keywords: strategic alliance; data envelopment analysis; grey prediction; automobile industry
1. Introduction
The automobile industry is a pillar of the global economy and a main driver of macroeconomic
growth and innovation. Its cycle intertwines with all major business cycles [1]. Since it has strong
linkages with other parts of the economy, this industry has been severely affected by the economic
recession starting in 2008. In spite of manufacturers trying various strategies, production is still below
its pre-crisis level.
This research investigation began with the top 50 automobile enterprises, by using the World
Ranking OICAs’ survey of 2012 [2]. However, the study was obliged to focus on the top 20, due to
a lack of public data. These enterprises played major roles and could fully represent the automobile
industry. Among them, Nissan Motor Company was ranked sixth by production volume. Established
in Japan in 1933, Nissan manufactures vehicles in 20 countries now. It also provides products and
services in more than 160 countries. Figure 1 shows Nissan’s global retail sales volume and market
share. Except for 2008, the enterprise had increased its sale volume and market share year by year
(3,569,000–5,650,000 units and 5.6%–6.7% from 2005 to 2014) [3].
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173; doi:10.3390/su8020173 232 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
Renault-Nissan Alliance chairman, Carlos Ghosn, said: “Renault-Nissan Alliance is deeply
committed to the twin goals of zero emissions and zero fatalities. That’s why we are developing
autonomous driving and connectivity for mass-market, mainstream vehicles on three continents”. This
alliance will launch more than 10 vehicles with autonomous drive technology in the next four years
in the US, Europe, Japan and China. The years 2016 and 2018 will mark the debut of vehicles with
“single-lane control”, and “multiple-lane control”. The year 2020 will see the launch of “intersection
autonomy”, which can allow cars to navigate city intersections and heavy urban traffic without driver
intervention. In addition, the alliance will launch a suite of new connectivity applications (APPs),
including for mobile devices, and the first “alliance multimedia system” in later years. Renault-Nissan
alliance is already the industry’s zero-emission leader with 300,000 all-electric vehicles sold since
December 2010. They have proven their ability to provide safe and efficient vehicles over time [4].
Figure 1. Global retail sales volume/market share.
However, the enterprise is faced with many difficulties, such as product recall (1.56 million
vehicles from 2008 to 2015, with about 25 million vehicles recalled with Takata airbags among
10 different carmakers worldwide since 2008) [5]. Moreover, Nissan’s 2013 annual report stated
that they aimed to increase their global market share to 8% by the end of the fiscal year 2016, up from
the current level of 6.2% [6]. The company is counting on expansion in big emerging markets such as
Brazil, Russia, India and China (BRIC) to drive sales and profit growth.
The tight competition among automakers leads to the continuous improvement of science and
technology, and especially their ability to meet the customer’s wishes. Important questions are
raised for the future of the automobile industry and Nissan. How will Nissan create value for the
customers, societies and for Nissan itself in the pursuit of perfection? How will it maintain its
competitiveness in fierce markets, expand its scale, produce high quality products while maintaining
low-costs and protecting the environment? The purpose of this study is to propose an effective
approach based on grey forecasting and data envelopment analysis (DEA) to find the best partners
of alliance. The model predicts future business and measures operation efficiency by using critical
input and output variables. From that, the enterprises can find their suitable candidates when setting
international business strategies. For this purpose, this study sets Nissan as a target decision making
unit (DMU) in order to conduct empirical research. The study’s results can be referenced for worldwide
automobile manufactures.
James et al. stated that “Alliances are fueling the success of a wide range of firms, including British
Petroleum, Eli Lilly, General Electric, Corning Glass, Federal Express, IBM, Starbucks, Cisco Systems,
Millennium Pharmaceuticals, and Siebel Systems” [7]. However, many enterprises have failed with
alliances or have not met the conditions of their partner. In this section, the research helps to define
strategic alliances and provides a literature review.
233
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
Mockler difined “Strategic alliances are agreements between companies (partners) to reach
objectives of common interest” [8]. International strategic alliances (ISAs) are voluntary, long-term,
contractual, cross-border relationships between two firms, designed to achieve specific objectives [9].
These definitions emphasize the importance of common business goals with the involved companies.
Cravens et al., distinguished strategic alliance as a horizontal collaborative relationship that does not
include any kind of equity exchange or creation of a new entity as in joint ventures [10]. Chan et al.
stated that: Strategic alliance is a cooperative agreement between different organizations. The purpose
of action aims at achieving the competitive advantages and sharing resources in product design,
production, marketing and/or distribution [11]. The types of alliances range from simple agreements
with no equity ties to more formal arrangements involving equity ownership and shared managerial
control over joint activities. The alliance activities can be supplier–buyer partnerships, outsourcing
agreements, technical collaboration, joint research projects, shared new product development, shared
manufacturing arrangements, common distribution agreements, and cross-selling arrangements.
The type that should be applied depends on the structures or objectives of each enterprise.
Besides that, the alliance should conform to competition laws, with the world’s largest and most
influential anti-trust law systems existing in the United States and European Union. However, business
cooperation could be seen as one kind of alliance as well. This research focuses on the selection of
business partners, so anti-trust law issues are not major focus of this study.
Candace et al. had investigated 89 high technology alliances and suggested that direct-competitor
alliances might be an inefficient means for innovating [12]. Cho et al. observed the trend of world
telecommunication and sought to answer whether alliance strategies needed to be regulated by the
government. By reviewing global alliance strategies in some countries, the research pointed towards
some reasonable recommendations for regulation of telecommunication enterprises [13]. Kauser and
Shaw investigated strategic alliance agreements among UK firms and their European, Japanese and
US partners. The results indicated that the majority of UK firms engaged in international partnerships
for marketing of relevant activities and for entering a foreign market. The findings had also indicated
that the majority of UK managers were satisfied with the overall performance of their international
strategic alliances [14]. Those papers had investigated alliances in various type of firms, however,
the lack of focus on the automobile industry is one of the impetuses for this research.
Forecast time series have been used quite regularly by researchers. There are various forecasting
models which have different mathematical backgrounds such as fuzzy predictors, neural networks,
trend extrapolation, and grey prediction. Grey system theory as an interdisciplinary scientific area was
first introduced in the early 1980s by Deng in 1982 [15].From then on, the theory has become a quite
popular method to deal with the uncertainty problems under partially unknown parameters and poor
or missing information. Superior to conventional statistical models, grey models claim only a limited
amount of data to evaluate the action of unknown systems [16].
The techniques of frontier analysis had been described by Farrel in 1957 [17], but a mathematical
framework to handle frontier analysis was established only after two decades. The DEA was introduced
by Charnes et al. [18]. They proposed a “data oriented” approach for measuring the performance of
multiple DMUs, by converting multiple input into multiple output. DMU could include manufacturing
units, schools, universities, bank branches, hospitals, power plants, etc. Recently, there have been
various DEA applications in private and public sectors of different countries.
Martín and Roman used DEA to analyze the technical efficiency and performance of each
individual Spanish airport. They used the results to put forward some policy considerations in
preparation for the process of privatization of the Spanish airport system [19]. Wang et al. applied
data envelopment analysis and the heuristic technique approach to help department stores find the
most proper partners for strategic alliances. The results indicated that candidate selection of strategic
alliances could be an effective strategy for enterprises to find out the right partners for cooperation [20].
Wang et al. used Grey and DEA techniques to measure production and marketing efficiencies of
23 companies in the printing circuit board industry. The results showed that 15 companies require
234
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
improvements in both production and marketing efficiency, while four companies had their production
efficiency improved and the remaining four firms experienced both improvement in production and
marketing efficiency [21]. Yuan and Tian applied the two-stage method of the DEA model to analyze
the science and technology resources efficiency of industrial enterprises and its influencing factors.
The results reflected the independence of the input element and the concentration of the output
element [22].
For the above reasons, the integrating model of Grey and DEA in alliance decision making is a
new effective approach in this research. The model predicts future business and measures operation
efficiency by using critical input and output variables. From that, automobile manufacturers can find
feasible candidates for alliance strategies.
2. Methodologies
2.1. Research Development
In this study, the researchers use GM(1,1) [16] and DEA models to construct a systematic forecast
and assessment approach. Figure 2 provides an overview of how to combine GM and DEA through
detailed steps. The study uses future data (prediction data by grey forecasting) as the inputs and
outputs of DEA. Then, the DEA method is used to compare alliance combinations. The research uses
GM(1,1) to develop a forecast approach through the use of time series data with four inputs and three
outputs. The prediction results are continuously put in the DEA model to measure the efficiency of all
DMUs before and after alliance. The steps involved in data collection and inputs-outputs selection
constitute the initial work of this study. Step 3 involves forecast work by using grey model GM(1,1) to
predict the data values in future years. In order to ensure that the forecasting error is reliable, MAPE
is employed to measure the prediction accuracy in Step 4. The researcher has to reselect input and
output factors if there is a high level of error.
Figure 2. Research development.
235
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
DEA is a linear programming methodology. It measures the efficiency of multiple DMUs with a
structure of multiple inputs and outputs. Hence, the super SBM-I-V model of DEA-Solver software is
applied for the calculations in Step 5. Step 6 employs the Pearson Correlation Coefficient Test to check
correlation values between inputs and outputs and whether they are positive or not. If the variables
have a negative coefficient, we remove them and go back to Step 2 to rebuild a new variable until it
can meet our requirements.
The aim of Step 7 is to find out the target company’s position in comparison with the other
19 automobiles competitors via ranking the efficiency of each decision making unit, by applying
the Super-SBM-I-V model in the realistic data. Step 8 is performed to establish new virtual
alliances by combining the target DMU6 with the other 19 DMUs, respectively. After consolidation,
the Super-SBM-I-V model is used to evaluate and rank new companies in comparison with existing
ones. Suggestions will be provided based on the analysis results of this step, but they do not necessarily
presume feasibility until further analysis in Step 9. In this step, the researcher looks more closely at the
candidate firms to determine possible approaches for forming alliances.
2.2. Collecting the DMUs
This research was only conducted examining the 20 companies in the World Ranking of
Manufacturing [2]. They have demonstrated a steady performance and can provide complete data for
four consecutive financial years (2009–2012) as reported in Bloomberg BusinessWeek [23]. Furthermore,
these enterprises are representative of the entire auto industry in the global market (Table 1). DMU6
Nissan is set as the target company. Recently, this auto maker has faced great challenges with regards
to globalization and competition. Hence, a strategic alliance could be part of an effective strategy for
DMU6 to acquire resources and build business relationships.
Table 1. List of Automobile Manufacturing Companies.
Number
Order
Code
DMUs Companies Name Headquarter
Address
Founded
Year
1 DMU1 Toyota Motor Corporation Japan 1937
2 DMU2 General Motors Company U.S 1908
3 DMU3 Volkswagen Group AG Germany 1937
4 DMU4 Hyundai Motor Company Korea 1967
5 DMU5 Ford Motor Co. U.S 1903
6 DMU6 Nissan Motor Co. Ltd. Japan 1933
7 DMU7 Fiat Automobiles S.p.A Italy 1899
8 DMU8 Honda Motor Co., Ltd. Japan 1948
9 DMU9 Suzuki Motor Corporation Japan 1909
10 DMU10 Renault S.A France 1899
11 DMU11 Daimler AG Germany 1926
12 DMU12 Bayerische MotorenWerke AG(BMW) Germany 1916
13 DMU13 Mazda Motor Corporation Japan 1920
14 DMU14 DongFeng Motor Corporation China 1969
15 DMU15 Mitsubishi Motors Corporation Japan 1970
16 DMU16 Chang An Automobile (Group) Co. Ltd. China 1862
17 DMU17 Tata Motors Ltd. (TTMT) India 1945
18 DMU18 Geely Automobile Holdings Ltd. China 1986
19 DMU19 Isuzu Motors Ltd. Japan 1916
20 DMU20 Daihatsu Motor Co. Ltd. Japan 1907
Source: World Ranking of Manufacturers [2].
236
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
2.3. Grey Forecasting Model
GM(1,1) model of this study is built based on two basic operations. Accumulated generation
operation (AGO) is applied to reduce the randomization of the raw data, and inverse accumulated
generation (IAGO) is used to find the predicted values of initial data. The data series must be more
than four, taking equal intervals and in consecutive order without neglecting any data [16]. The
GM(1,1) model establishment process in this study is summarized as follows:
Establish the initial series Xp0q by
Xp0q “
´
Xp0q p1q , Xp0q p2q , . . . , Xp0q pnq
¯
, n ě 4 (1)
where Xp0q is a non-negative sequence and n is the number of years observed.
Based on initial series Xp0q, a new sequence Xp1q is set up through the AGO, which is
Xp1q “
´
Xp1q p1q , Xp1q p2q , . . . , Xp1q pnq
¯
, n ě 4 (2)
where Xp1q p1q “ Xp0q p1q and Xp1q pkq “
ÿk
i“1
X
p0q
piq , k “ 1, 2, 3, . . . , n (3)
Define mean value series Zp1q of adjacent data Xp1q as:
Zp1q “
´
Zp1q p1q , Zp1q p2q , . . . , Zp1q pnq
¯
(4)
where Zp1q(k) is calculated as follow:
Zp1q pkq “ 0.5ˆ
´
Xp1q pkq` Xp1q pk ´1q
¯
, k “ 2, 3, . . . , n (5)
The GM(1,1) model can be built by establishing first order differential equation for Xp1q pkq.
dXp1q pkq
dk
` aXp1qk “ b (6)
where parameter a is developing coefficient and b is grey input.
The solution to Equation (6) can be found by using the least square method to find parameters
a and b: «
a
b
ffT
“
´
BTB
¯´1
BTYN (7)
B “
»
—–
´Zp1q p2q 1
. . . . . . . . . . . .
´Zp1q pnq 1
fi
ffi fl
(8)
and
YN “
»
—–
Xp0q p2q
. . . . . . . . .
Xp0q pnq
fi
ffi fl
(9)
(B is called data matrix, Y is called data series, and ra, bsT is called parameter series).
According to Equation (6), the solution of Xp1q(k) at time k:
ˆX
p1q pk `1q “
„
Xp0q p1q´ b
a
j
e´ak ` b
a
pk “ 1, 2, 3, . . .q (10)
237
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
We acquired ˆXp1q from Equation (10). Let ˆXp0q be the GM(1,1) fitted and predicted series
ˆX
p0q “
´
ˆX
p0q p1q , ˆX p0q p2q , . . . , ˆXp0q pnq , . . .
¯
, where ˆXp0q p1q “ Xp0q p1q (11)
Finally, to obtain the predicted value of the primitive data at time (k + 1), the inverse accumulated
generating operation (IAGO) is used to establish the following grey model:
Xp0q pk `1q “
„
Xp0q p1q´ b
a
j
e´ak p1 ´ eaq pk “ 1, 2, 3, . . .q (12)
In general, the grey forecasting model uses this operation to construct differential Equations.
2.4. Non-Radial Super Efficiency Model (Super-SBM)
The super SBM was developed on a non-radial model called SBM “Slacks-based measure of
efficiency” introduced by Tone in 2001 [24], which directly deals with input and output slacks and
return efficiency scores between 0 and 1. SBM deals with n DMUs, each DMU having input/output
matrices X “
`
xij
˘
P Rmˆ n and Y “
`
Yij
˘
P Rsˆn, respectively. λ is a non-negative vector in Rn.
Vectors S´ P Rm and S` P Rs are the input excess and output shortfalls, respectively [25]. To estimate
the efficiency of (x0, y0q, the SBM programwas formulated as follows [24]:
min ρ “
1 ´ 1
m
řm
i“1 S´
i
{xi0
1 ` 1
s
řs
i“1 S`
i
{yi0
(13)
st.x0 “ Xλ ` S´, y0 “ Yλ ´ S`, λ ě 0, S´ ě 0, S` ě 0 (14)
Let an optimal solution for SBM be pp˚, λ
˚, S´˚, S`˚q. A DMU(x0, y0q is SBM-efficient, if p˚ “ 1.
That means S´˚ “ 0, and S`˚ “ 0 (or no input excesses and no output shortfalls). Based on this
assumption, Tone has proposed a super-efficiency model for ranking DMUs and it was identified as
following program [26]:
min δ “
1
m
řm
i“1 xi{xi0
1
s
řs
r“1 yr
{yr0
(15)
st.x ě
ÿ
nj
“1,‰0λjxj, y ď
ÿ
nj
“1,‰0λjxj, x ě x0, and y ď y0, y ě 0, λ ě 0 (16)
If the denominator is equal to 1, the objective function will become the input-oriented of the super
SBM model and it returns a value for the objective function which is greater or equal to one.
By the nature of things, inputs should be positive, but outputs may be negative. Nevertheless,
many DEA models including SBM models cannot handle non-positive outputs, until a new scheme
was introduced in DEA-Solver pro 4.1 Manual [25].
Suppose that yr0 ď 0. It has defined y`
r and y`
´ r by
y`
r
“ max
j“1,...,n

yrj
ˇˇ
yrj ą 0
(
, (17)
y`
r
“ min
j“1,...,n

yrj
ˇˇ
yrj ą 0
(
, (18)
In the objective function, if the output r has no positive elements, then it is defined as
y`
r
“ y`
´ r
“ 1. The term s`
r
{yr0 will be replaced in the following way. (The value yr0 of in the
constraints has never changed).
238
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
If y`
r
ą y`
´ r the term is replaced by:
s`
r
{ y `
´r
`
y`
r
´ y`
´ r
˘
y`
r
´ yr0
(19)
If y`
r
“ y`
´ r the term is replaced by:
s`
r
{
`
y `
´r
˘2
B
`
y`
r
´ yr0
˘ (20)
where B is a large positive number, (in DEA-Solver B = 100).
Furthermore, the denominator is positive and strictly less than y`
´ r. Moreover, it isinverse to the
distance y`
r
´ yr0. Hence, this scheme concerns the magnitude of the nonpositive output positively.
The score obtained is units invariant; it is independent of the units of measurement used [25].
2.5. EstablishingInput/Output Variables
In order to adequately measure the efficiency of a DEA model and simultaneously help the
target DMU to find the right alliance partners, the selection of input and output elements should be
carefully considered. Based on literature reviews of DEA, automobile operations, the International
Accounting Standard (IAS) [27], and also the suitable correlation between input and output, in this
research we decided to select four inputs factors, including fixed assets (Fix.as), cost of goods sold
(Cogs), operating expenses (O.exp) and long-term investment (L.inv). Revenues (Rev), total equity
(T.eq) and net incomes (Net.in) are chosen as output factors. These indicators provide a signal to
measure the health of a firm and the benefit it could bring through a strategic alliance to all owners
and investors. In the interest of length, the researcher only shows the data from 2012. Detailed data are
shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Inputs and outputs data of all DMUs in 2012.
DMUs
Inputs (1,000,000 U.S Dollars) Outputs (1,000,000 U.S Dollars)
(I) Fix.as (I) Cogs (I) O.exp (I) L.inv (O) Rev (O) T.eq (O) Net.in
DMU1 65,703.40 172,721.40 19,298.00 71,530.40 211,595.60 122,619.40 9227.10
DMU2 24,196.00 135,963.00 12,231.00 7062.00 152,256.00 37,000.00 6188.00
DMU3 73,415.80 193,658.50 29,135.30 18,222.00 262,873.60 111,594.60 16,412.90
DMU4 26,870.00 61,106.30 10,402.50 13,809.10 79,443.80 45,066.50 8052.40
DMU5 26,228.00 112,578.00 12,175.00 3133.00 134,252.00 16,311.00 5665.00
DMU6 41,837.50 76,937.30 10,389.50 5825.40 92,347.60 39,069.60 3284.10
DMU7 25,559.20 96,989.80 11,667.40 2693.50 114,181.50 17,919.60 473.30
DMU8 22,987.50 70,440.10 19,220.80 6370.80 94,729.50 49,794.40 3521.00
DMU9 5829.00 18,386.10 4935.10 2602.20 24,700.30 12,440.10 770.10
DMU10 15,687.20 46,373.30 8772.20 22,333.90 56,137.10 33,385.90 2410.30
DMU11 60,398.20 120,679.40 24,397.90 9401.60 155,483.90 61,910.90 8291.30
DMU12 14,607.30 63,896.00 8537.50 4367.10 104,556.30 41,360.70 6933.40
DMU13 7522.30 16,583.90 4047.30 1299.80 21,148.50 4921.80 329.00
DMU14 4264.70 16,536.50 2503.80 316.40 20,484.50 9518.10 1501.50
DMU15 3714.30 14,161.40 2616.90 929.40 17,425.10 3371.80 364.60
DMU16 2383.40 3970.00 1004.00 1292.70 4865.50 2541.50 238.90
DMU17 5970.30 21,734.80 6206.30 246.60 30,701.70 6183.90 1608.50
DMU18 1157.00 3313.40 475.70 32.80 4066.10 2180.00 336.80
DMU19 4799.80 13,420.40 1187.20 1369.50 15,860.50 5948.80 924.80
DMU20 4267.20 13,378.20 2582.20 5787.30 17,261.50 15,512.00 796.20
Sources: Bloomberg news [23].
239
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Prediction Results
This research applies the GM(1,1) model to predict the input/output factors for future years.
The fixed assets of DMU6 were selected as an example to condcut the experiment (Table 3), and other
variables are computed in line with the following steps:
Table 3. Inputs and outputs factors of DMU6 in the period of 2009–2012.
Inputs (1,000,000 U.S dollars) Outputs (1,000,000 U.S dollars)
DMU6 (I) Fix.as (I) Cogs (I) O.exp (I) L.inv (O) Rev (O) T.eq (O) Net.in
2009 36,999.50 55,140.60 10,264.70 2548.20 72,090.70 28,914.90 406.50
2010 34,879.20 68,617.40 10,362.20 5113.30 84,134.00 31,395.60 3061.30
2011 35,782.60 74,541.50 10,456.50 4916.10 90,232.60 33,085.50 3274.30
2012 41,837.50 76,937.30 10,389.50 5825.40 92,347.60 39,069.60 3284.10
Sources: Bloomberg news [23].
1st: establish the original series:
Xp0q “ p36, 999.50; 34, 879.20; 35, 782.60; 41, 837.50q
2nd: create Xp1q series by executing the accumulated generating operation (AGO):
Xp1q “ p36, 999.50; 71, 878.70; 107, 661.30; 149, 498.80q
3rd: calculate mean sequence Zp1q of Xp1q by the mean equation:
Zp1q pkq “ p54, 439.10; 89, 770.00; 128, 580.05q , k “ 2, 3, 4
4th: solve equations:
To find a and b, the original series are substituted into the Grey differential equation:
$’&
’%
34, 879.20 ` a ˆ 54, 439.10 “ b
35, 782.60 ` a ˆ 89, 770.00 “ b
41, 837.50 ` a ˆ 128, 580.05 “ b
and convert the linear equations into the form of a matrix:
Let B “
»
—–
´54, 439.10 1
´89, 770.00 1
´128, 580.05 1
fi
ffi fl
, ˆ θ “
«
a
b
ff
,YN “
»
—–
34, 879.20
35, 782.60
41, 837.50
fi
ffi fl
Before using the least square method to find a and b
ˆ θ “
´
BTB
¯´1
BTYN “
«
´ 0.094869531
28, 873.31
ff
use the two coefficients a and b to generate the whitening equation of the differential equation:
dXp1q
dk
´0.09486531ˆ Xp1q “ 28, 873.31
240
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
Find the prediction model from equation:
ˆX
p1q pk `1q “
„
Xp0q p1q´ b
a
j
e´ak ` b
a
“ 341, 347.05 ˚ e0.094869531 k ´304, 347.56
Finding X(1) series by substituting different values of k into above equation:
K “ 0 Xp1q p1q “ 36, 999.50
K “ 1 Xp1q p2q “ 70, 968.78
K “ 2 Xp1q p3q “ 108, 318.53
K “ 3 Xp1q p4q “ 149, 385.16
K “ 4 Xp1q p5q “ 194, 538.55
K “ 5 Xp1q p6q “ 244, 185.39
K “ 6 Xp1q p7q “ 298, 772.86
K “ 7 Xp1q p8q “ 358, 792.60
K “ 8 Xp1q p9q “ 424, 785.30
Originate the predicted value of the original series according to the IAGO and obtain:
ˆX
p0q p1q “ ˆXp1q p1q “ 36, 999.50
ˆX
p0q p2q “ ˆXp1q p2q´ ˆXp1q p1q “ 33, 969.28
ˆX
p0q p3q “ ˆXp1q p3q´ ˆXp1q p2q “ 37, 349.75
ˆX
p0q p4q “ ˆXp1q p4q´ ˆXp1q p3q “ 41, 066.63
ˆX
p0q p5q “ ˆXp1q p5q´ ˆXp1q p4q “ 45, 153.39
ˆX
p0q p6q “ ˆXp1q p6q´ ˆXp1q p5q “ 49, 646.84
ˆX
p0q p7q “ ˆXp1q p7q´ ˆXp1q p6q “ 54, 587.47 ppredicted value of 2015q
ˆX
p0q p8q “ ˆXp1q p8q´ ˆXp1q p7q “ 60, 019.76 ppredicted value of 2016q
ˆX
p0q p9q “ ˆXp1q p9q´ ˆXp1q p8q “ 65, 992.65 ppredicted value of 2017q
Using the above computation process, this research could obtain the forecasting result of all DMUs for
subsequent years; the detailed data is shown in the following Table 4:
241
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
Table 4. Predicted inputs and outputs value of all DMUs in 2016 and 2017 (calculated by GM).
Inputs (1,000,000 U.S Dollars) Outputs (1,000,000 U.S Dollars)
DMUs
(I) Fixed Assets (I) Cost of Goods
Sold
(I) Operating
Expenses
(I) Long-Term
Investments (O) Revenues (O) Total Equity (O) Net Income
2016 2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016 2017
1 76,687.0 80,030.2 217,158.9 231,159.2 21,093.2 21,674.4 124,614.0 143,671.4 283,274.9 306,795.8 166,888.2 181,102.1 86,510.6 163,021.6
2 38,145.7 42,570.8 178,534.5 190,828.1 13,791.7 14,196.5 4366.8 3925.1 193,191.1 204,363.3 37,327.8 37,250.5 7218.4 7225.4
3 175,325.5 218,068.3 440,708.4 541,512.0 70,484.0 88,446.5 13,915.8 12,926.1 597,532.6 733,901.5 309,703.8 400,581.0 39,379.8 48,592.5
4 48,927.6 56,836.7 97,854.3 109,970.5 13,680.6 14,598.0 30,158.2 36,413.7 125,928.4 141,029.0 94,663.7 113,980.0 18,263.2 22,307.3
5 30,115.6 31,336.1 132,009.9 136,898.3 12,647.2 12,809.7 4785.4 5321.4 146,889.9 149,806.7 255,175.4 480,692.6 9401.7 9142.5
6 60,019.8 65,992.7 97,057.8 102,672.3 10,471.0 10,484.7 7474.2 8014.2 111,709.3 116,949.5 60,499.7 67,763.5 3806.0 3939.1
7 90,406.1 122,177.9 467,417.7 694,650.7 48,355.5 69,039.4 4189.9 4586.4 553,201.8 823,165.7 19,817.2 20,392.2 666.2 614.5
8 35,211.1 39,412.1 88,989.2 95,371.2 22,491.6 23,502.5 7113.9 7335.8 112,881.3 119,350.7 63,448.4 67,790.1 840.9 634.9
9 7800.2 8453.0 17,034.6 16,740.1 4814.0 4813.7 3,808.5 4288.3 23,871.2 23,731.1 17,023.6 18,511.6 2539.4 3452.4
10 15,696.1 15,716.8 58,170.3 61,220.3 8950.3 8957.0 26,398.2 27,397.1 63,902.8 65,684.6 39,160.3 40,631.7 517.4 360.8
11 93,944.0 104,884.2 168,675.6 183,521.6 30,441.0 32,120.4 11,399.9 11,929.0 212,500.5 229,667.8 88,905.4 97,380.6 15,001.0 17,320.3
12 14,614.5 14,620.7 111,821.0 128,629.1 11,900.1 12,919.7 8890.3 10,659.5 168,383.5 189,641.2 66,600.4 75,028.9 16,066.7 19,633.6
13 7483.8 7475.0 13,790.7 13,258.6 3682.3 3611.6 2085.2 2361.6 18,188.0 17,676.6 6989.7 7626.8 (26.9) (15.5)
14 8247.3 9742.0 18,320.8 18,691.4 2980.0 3107.2 584.8 677.3 21,475.1 21,612.5 18,359.5 21,633.1 1061.7 969.0
15 3752.8 3769.3 12,944.6 12,671.4 3134.7 3283.5 195.9 139.7 17,123.7 17,060.5 6888.1 8292.9 2053.7 3194.6
16 10,976.2 16,122.6 2782.9 2577.6 1169.5 1228.2 2212.4 2512.8 3431.6 3193.3 5032.9 5927.1 72.9 57.5
17 12,773.6 15,467.8 48,191.7 58,533.9 18,354.1 24,129.1 315.3 336.3 70,654.4 86,707.7 20,429.5 27,357.7 2009.5 2060.9
18 1887.2 2120.0 4968.6 5520.2 691.8 763.2 569.9 1214.5 6098.0 6776.8 4676.1 5689.8 761.0 938.4
19 5078.6 5165.0 17,717.1 19,116.2 1424.2 1495.0 2995.5 3645.7 21,553.3 23,418.1 15,263.3 19,376.8 2746.9 3565.4
20 4868.4 5042.3 16,840.6 17,860.6 3156.8 3324.7 10,075.6 11,595.4 22,055.2 23,479.8 40,887.8 52,126.0 1894.9 2357.8
Source: Calculated by researcher.
242
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
3.2. Forecasting Accuracy
Forecasting method is implemented to predict future results using the present uncompleted
information, so we do not introduce new errors. Hence, the MAPE (Mean absolute percent error) is
employed to measure the accuracy values in statistics. The smaller values of MAPE demonstrate that
the forecasting values are more reasonable [28]. The results of MAPE are shown in Table 5:
Table 5. Average MAPE of DMUs.
DMUs Average MAPE DMUs Average MAPE
DMU1 5.84809% DMU11 0.79240%
DMU2 3.52436% DMU12 1.30784%
DMU3 1.90186% DMU13 10.8717%
DMU4 1.71334% DMU14 1.65806%
DMU5 45.3331% DMU15 3.07850%
DMU6 1.51432% DMU16 6.56818%
DMU7 11.4944% DMU17 3.83133%
DMU8 6.64905% DMU18 3.48085%
DMU9 3.99930% DMU19 2.67108%
DMU10 2.22754% DMU20 0.68057%
Average MAPE of 20 DMUs 5.95730%
Most of the MAPE values are good and qualified, being smaller than 10%. The average of all
MAPE reaches 5.95730%.This affirms that the GM(1,1) model offers a high accurate prediction. DMU5
obtains a 45% higher MAPE value because it is strongly affected by the 2008 crisis. However, based on
the MAPE accuracy standards, only this value is qualified.
3.3. Pearson Correlation
The homogeneity and isotonicity are two major basic DEA data assumptions. The basic DEA
assumption between input data and output data needs to be isotonic. The means the input data and
output data need to have a positive correlation. Correlation test is an important step in applying the
DEA technique to ensure the relationship between input and output factors is isotonic (i.e., an increase
in any input should not result in a decrease in any output) [29]. This study employs a simple correlation
test—Pearson correlation—to measure the strength of the linear relationship of normal distributed
variables [30]. If the correlation coefficient is positive, these factors are isotonically related and will
be put into the DEA model; when the factor demonstrates a weak isotonic relationship, it will be
reexamined [31]. The correlation coefficient is always between ´1 and +1.
The results of correlation coefficients between input and output variables in Tables 6–9 show
strong positive associations and comply with the precondition of the DEA model. Hence, these positive
correlations also prove that the selection of input and output variables is appropriate. This means
those data are proper for DEA assumption and can be used for the analysis for DEA calculations.
Table 6. Correlation of input and output data in 2009.
Fix.as Cogs O.exp L.inv Rev T.eq Net.in
Fix.as 1 0.900516 0.902008 0.770458 0.924567 0.868580 0.010851
Cogs 0.900516 1 0.916182 0.750937 0.989125 0.788681 0.334254
O.exp 0.902008 0.916182 1 0.666827 0.938334 0.799956 0.140062
L.inv 0.770454 0.750937 0.666827 1 0.745437 0.887277 0.090390
Rev 0.924567 0.989125 0.938334 0.745437 1 0.812591 0.225816
T.eq 0.868580 0.788681 0.799956 0.887277 0.812591 1 0.078414
Net.in 0.010851 0.334254 0.140062 0.090390 0.225816 0.078414 1
243
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
Table 7. Correlation of input and output data in 2010.
Fix.as Cogs O.exp L.inv Rev T.eq Net.in
Fix.as 1 0.908011 0.901304 0.760279 0.915191 0.888756 0.712517
Cogs 0.908011 1 0.884399 0.701945 0.991911 0.821255 0.810075
O.exp 0.901304 0.884399 1 0.598485 0.907604 0.826895 0.827244
L.inv 0.760279 0.701945 0.598485 1 0.680493 0.878784 0.421430
Rev 0.915191 0.991911 0.907604 0.680493 1 0.831531 0.851679
T.eq 0.888756 0.821255 0.826895 0.878784 0.831531 1 0.626496
Net.in 0.712517 0.810075 0.827244 0.421430 0.851679 0.626496 1
Table 8. Correlation of input and output data in 2011.
Fix.as Cogs O.exp L.inv Rev T.eq Net.in
Fix.as 1 0.908680 0.911810 0.691419 0.915207 0.909611 0.535213
Cogs 0.908680 1 0.872887 0.627072 0.991641 0.853222 0.728935
O.exp 0.911810 0.872887 1 0.547521 0.893166 0.855927 0.586748
L.inv 0.691419 0.627072 0.547521 1 0.600729 0.846506 0.142137
Rev 0.915207 0.991641 0.893166 0.600729 1 0.867635 0.750202
T.eq 0.909612 0.853222 0.855927 0.846506 0.867635 1 0.413475
Net.in 0.535214 0.728935 0.586748 0.142137 0.750202 0.413475 1
Table 9. Correlation of input and output data in 2012.
Fix.as Cogs O.exp L.inv Rev T.eq Net.in
Fix.as 1 0.916378 0.921629 0.632545 0.925523 0.913111 0.85602
Cogs 0.916377 1 0.898532 0.594043 0.992487 0.861108 0.857803
O.exp 0.921629 0.898532 1 0.481858 0.919848 0.860337 0.84896
L.inv 0.632545 0.594043 0.481858 1 0.580518 0.796618 0.50826
Rev 0.925523 0.992487 0.919848 0.580518 1 0.886316 0.897967
T.eq 0.913110 0.861108 0.860337 0.796617 0.886316 1 0.874886
Net.in 0.856015 0.857803 0.84896 0.508260 0.897967 0.874886 1
Remark: Fixed assets (Fix.as), Cost of goods sold (Cogs), Operating expenses (O.exp); Long-term investment
(L.inv). Revenues (Rev), Total equity (T.eq) and Net incomes (Net.in).
3.4. Analysis before Alliance
In this research, the efficiency of 20 DMUs and their ranking before alliances was measured by
the Super-SBM-I-V model, with the realistic data of 2012. The empirical results of Table 10 indicated
that DMU18 has the best efficiency (the first ranking with the score = 5.8965750), followed by DMU12
and DMU14 ranking second and third place. The target DMU6 is in the 18th ranking, being part of the
last group. This ranking emphasizes again that it is necessary for the target company to form strategic
alliances to improve its performance.
Table 10. Efficiency and ranking before alliances.
Rank DMU Score
1 DMU18 5.8965750
2 DMU12 1.5655136
3 DMU14 1.3982037
4 DMU17 1.3777954
5 DMU20 1.3447020
6 DMU5 1.2097953
7 DMU2 1.1359231
8 DMU4 1.0876949
244
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
Table 10. Cont.
Rank DMU Score
9 DMU19 1.0484095
10 DMU8 1.0307413
11 DMU7 1.0133168
12 DMU1 1
12 DMU3 1
14 DMU11 0.7448770
15 DMU9 0.7176400
16 DMU15 0.7105391
17 DMU10 0.7104498
18 DMU6 0.6492883
19 DMU13 0.5816934
20 DMU16 0.5283717
3.5. Analysis after Alliance
The low inefficiency score (0.6492883 < 1) and low rank (18th/20) of target DMU6 suggests that
the enterprise should enhance its operating efficiency and seek advantages from cooperative partners
by building a creative alliance strategy. To implement the empirical results, this research combines
DMU6 with the remaining DMUs to form 39 virtual DMUs (19 alliances and 20 original cases) in
total. The software of DEA-Solver Pro 8.0–Super-SBM-I-V model built by Saitech Company was
employed to compute efficiency for all new DMUs. Table 11 shows the ranking results and scores of
the virtual alliances.
Table 11. Performance ranking of virtual DMUs.
Rank DMU Score Rank DMU Score
1 DMU18 5.8965750 21 DMU6 + DMU4 0.9011136
2 DMU12 1.5655136 22 DMU6 + DMU11 0.8376827
3 DMU14 1.3982037 23 DMU6 + DMU20 0.7731485
4 DMU17 1.3777954 24 DMU6 + DMU14 0.7545630
5 DMU20 1.3447020 25 DMU6 + DMU10 0.7462483
6 DMU5 1.1714878 26 DMU11 0.7229771
7 DMU3 1.1161306 27 DMU9 0.7176400
8 DMU1 1.1140650 28 DMU6 + DMU9 0.7113479
9 DMU2 1.1058616 29 DMU15 0.7105391
10 DMU4 1.0876949 30 DMU10 0.7104498
11 DMU6 + DMU5 1.0655124 31 DMU6 + DMU17 0.7013426
12 DMU19 1.0484095 32 DMU6 + DMU19 0.6720799
13 DMU6 + DMU12 1.0443239 33 DMU6 + DMU18 0.6649845
14 DMU6 + DMU2 1.0400331 34 DMU6 0.6492883
15 DMU8 1.0282731 35 DMU6 + DMU15 0.6279972
16 DMU7 1.0133168 36 DMU6 + DMU16 0.6265420
17 DMU6 + DMU8 1.0117510 37 DMU6 + DMU13 0.6219810
18 DMU6 + DMU7 1.0002026 38 DMU13 0.5816934
19 DMU6 + DMU3 1 39 DMU16 0.5283717
19 DMU6 + DMU1 1
The results of Table 11 indicate clearly the change from original DMUs to a virtual alliance at
different rates. The target DMU6 shows the highest efficiency scores in a relationship with DMU1,
DMU3, DMU7, DMU8, DMU2, DMU12 and DMU5. The researcher can compare the efficiency between
them by separating them into two groups (see Table 12). The fact that the group has positive results
proves these alliances are better than original DMUs. A higher difference value the increased efficiency
of an alliance. In contrast, the negative value of the second group means the alliance is worse.
245
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
Table 12. The good & bad alliance partnership.
Number Order Virtual Alliance Target DMU6
Ranking (1)
Virtual alliance
Ranking (2) Difference (1)–(2)
1st group Good alliance
1 DMU6 + DMU5 34 11 23
2 DMU6 + DMU12 34 13 21
3 DMU6 + DMU2 34 14 20
4 DMU6 + DMU8 34 17 17
5 DMU6 + DMU7 34 18 16
6 DMU6 + DMU3 34 19 15
7 DMU6 + DMU1 34 19 15
8 DMU6 + DMU4 34 21 13
9 DMU6 + DMU11 34 22 12
10 DMU6 + DMU20 34 23 11
11 DMU6 + DMU14 34 24 10
12 DMU6 + DMU10 34 25 9
13 DMU6 + DMU9 34 28 6
14 DMU6 + DMU17 34 31 3
15 DMU6 + DMU19 34 32 2
16 DMU6 + DMU18 34 33 1
2nd group Bad Alliance
1 DMU6 + DMU15 34 35 ´1
2 DMU6 + DMU16 34 36 ´2
3 DMU6 + DMU13 34 37 ´3
In the first group, the ranking of target DMU is improved after an alliance with another
16 enterprises (DMU1, DMU2, DMU3, DMU4, DMU5, DMU7, DMU8, DMU9, DMU10, DMU11,
DMU12, DMU14, DMU17, DMU18, DMU19 and DMU20). This demonstrates that target DMU can
take advantages from alliance. The alliance of DMU6 + DMU5, DMU6 + DMU12, DMU6 + DMU2,
DMU6 + DMU8 and DMU6 + DMU7 gets the highest efficiency (score >1). Hence, those five candidates
will be firstly priority when considering alliance partners. Especially, DMU5 is one of the best potential
candidates because of its largest difference value (23). The second group has three enterprises including
(DMU15, DMU16, and DMU13) of which DMU6 is worse off after strategic alliances (DMUs’ ranking
reduced). Thus, those firms would not be chosen by a target DMU because they do not help the
enterprise in its vision.
3.6. Partner Selection
In the previous section, the best alliance partnerships are identified based on the position of
the target DMU6. Nevertheless, we must further analyze the feasibility of alliance partnerships and
compare situations before and after alliances. It can be seen clearly, as shown in the results in Table 12,
that there are 16 good partners. However, they will not cooperate with the target DMU, because, the
DMU’s ranking is lower. In other words, the performance of DMU1, DMU2, DMU3, DMU4, DMU5,
DMU7, DMU8, DMU9, DMU12, DMU14, DMU17, DMU18, DMU19 and DMU20 are already good;
if there are no special circumstances, they currently have no incentive to form an alliance partnership
with the DMU6.
Figure 3 shows more clearly the change in ranking of the above DMUs before and after alliance
with target DMU6. The blue line is nearer to the center-point than the red line in most DMUs.
This indicates that most of the DMUs have a high efficiency before alliance, but some of them
are lower before the alliance relationship (DMU6 + DMU10, DMU6 + DMU11, DMU6 + DMU13,
DMU6 + DMU16).
246
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
Figure 3. The comparison of changes in ranking.
Combined with Tables 10–12 the efficiency and ranking of all DMUs before and after alliance
are reviewed again in Figure 3. Those points which are more close to the center are ranked higher.
The points clearly point to an alliance with Renault and Daimler with the target company. Renault and
Daimler are not at the level of DEA before alliance; however, their rankings improved after cooperating
with Nissan. It means the alliance can bring benefits not only for Nissan but also for Renault and
Daimler. In other words, through the alliance, both of Nissan–Renault and Nissan–Daimler AG,
opportunities to manage their resource more effectively may arise. Hence, Renault and Daimler should
have a strong desire to form an alliance.
In fact, Nissan–Renault has maintained an alliance relationship since 1999. These enterprises now
are developing a three-party alliance between Renault–Nissan–Daimler AG. This once again proves
the results of this paper are correct and have practical feasibility. However, Nissan should continue
to cooperate to effectively utilize the resources of both parties. This will be entailing an intersection
between Eastern and Western culture, in line with current globalization trends. The alliance can help
to build a production system, which can reduce waste, create value for the customer and achieve
perfection. Besides that, the company also needs to enhance common understanding, seeking potential
cooperation opportunities from less feasible alliance partners.
In a word, the results and findings of this case study also lead to new recommendations for
strategic alliances. The readers can clearly recognize the noticeable candidates for an alliance strategy
are Ford Motor (DMU5, the best efficiency improvement for the target company), Renault and Daimler
(the efficiency improvement for both target DMU6 and partners DMU10, DMU11).
4. Conclusions
Nowadays, the automobile industry as well as many other industries faces numerous challenges
such as: How to achieve competitive advantage and enter new markets? How to obtain new technology
and resources and how to reduce risk and share costs of research and development? For solving these
problems, this research proposed a decision making model by using a hybrid of Grey theory and DEA.
This study focused on the relationship between strategic alliances and the performance of the top 20
enterprises in the automobile industry.
247
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
Based on the realistic public data of automobile enterprises from 2009 to 2012, this study
used GM(1,1) model to predict the future change in value of the specific input/output variables.
The accuracy forecast value had been tested by average MAPE and a reliable percentage of 5.9573%
was obtained.
Nissan was used as a case study to determine the potential benefits of strategic alliances between
firms. The DEA-Super SBM model was applied to evaluate efficiency all real DMUs and virtual DMUs.
The empirical results showed that 16 candidates are suitable for Nissan to form strategic alliances with,
of which Ford, BMW, General Motors, Honda, and Fiat are strongly recommended. However, only
two partnerships are feasible for Nissan (Nissan–Renault and Nissan–Daimler). If a firm decides to
form an alliance, it is necessary to conduct extensive an assessment of performance before and after
the alliance in terms of many aspects.
In conclusion, by combining Grey theory and the Super SBM model, this research proposed a new
accurate and appropriate approach to forecast and evaluate automobile firms. This model provides a
reference for decision making for automaker strategists when developing alliance strategies.
The DEA is one kind of sensitive method for factor selection. The selection of input/output
variables could be different, and the results would be impacted. Therefore, robust checking is necessary.
The different input/output variables and removing outlierd from DMUs should be re-calculated
and re-discussed.
For future study, sensitive analysis for different inputs or outputs of DMUs or data of different
years can be discussed further. Moreover, the methodology should be further developed by using
qualitative data and should be applied in different industries.
Author Contributions: Author Contributions: In this paper, Chia-NanWang contributed to design the theoretical
verifications. Xuan-Tho Nguyen collected and analyzed data and prepared for the manuscript. Yen-Hui Wang is
involved in results discussion. All authors have both read and approved the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Haugh, D.; Mourougane, A.; Chatal, O. The automobile industry in and beyond the crisis. OECD Econ. Dep.
Work. Pap. 2010, 2009. [CrossRef]
2. OICA.World Ranking of Manufacturers. Available online: http://www.oica.net/wp-content/uploads/2013/
03/worldpro2012-modification-ranking.pdf (accessed on 20 May 2014).
3. Global Retail Sales Volume/Market Share. Available online: http://www.nissan-global.com/EN/DOCU
MENT/PDF/AR/2014/p23_e.pdf (accessed on 12 August 2015).
4. Renault-Nissan to Launch More than 10 Driverless Cars through 2020. Available online: http://www.
autoevolution.com/news/renault-nissan-to-launch-more-than-10-driverless-cars-through-2020-103503.html
(accessed on 25 January 2016).
5. Toyota and Nissan Recall 6.5 Million Cars Over Airbags. Available online: http://www.bbc.com/news/
business-32716802 (accessed on 13 May 2015).
6. Nisan Annual Report. Available online: http://www.nissan-global.com/EN/DOCUMENT/PDF/AR/2013/
AR2013_E_All.pdf (accessed on 20 May 2014).
7. James, D.B.; Benjamin, G.C.; Michael, S.R. Mastering Alliance Strategy; John Wiley & Sons, Inc: New York, NY,
USA, 2003; pp. 1–19.
8. Mockler, R.J. Multinational strategic alliances: A manager’s perspective. Strateg. Chang. 1997, 6, 391–405.
[CrossRef]
9. Brouthers, K.D.; Bamossy, G.J. Post-formation processes in eastern and western European joint ventures.
J. Manag. Stud. 2006, 43, 203–229. [CrossRef]
10. Cravens, D.W.; Shipp, S.H.; Cravens, K.S. Analysis of cooperative inter-organizational relationships, strategic
alliance formation, and strategic alliance effectiveness. J. Strateg. Mark. 1993, 1, 55–70. [CrossRef]
11. Chan, S.H.; Kensinger, J.W.; Keown, A.J.; Martin, J.D. Do strategic alliances create value? J. Financ. Econ.
1997, 46, 199–221. [CrossRef]
248
Sustainability 2016, 8, 173
12. Candace, E.Y.; Thomas, A.T. Strategic alliances with competing firms and shareholder value. J. Manag.
Mark. Res. 2011, 6, 1–10.
13. Cho, B.S.; Kang, S.W.; Cha, S.M. Trends in telecommunication strategic alliance regulation. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Technology Management for the Global Future, Istanbul, Turkey, 8–13 July 2006; IEEE: Piscataway,
NJ, USA, 2006; Volume 4, pp. 1994–2004.
14. Kauser, S.; Shaw, V. International strategic alliances: Objectives, motives and success. J. Glob. Mark. 2004, 17,
7–43. [CrossRef]
15. Deng, J.L. Control problems of Grey systems. Syst. Control Lett. 1982, 5, 288–294.
16. Deng, J.L. Introduction to Grey system theory. J. Grey Syst. 1989, 1, 1–24.
17. Farrell, M.J. The measurement of productivity efficiency. J. R. Stat. Soc. 1957, 120, 499–513.
18. Charnes, A.; Cooper,W.W.; Rhodes, E. Measuring the efficiency of decision making units. Eur. J. Oper. Res.
1978, 2, 429–444. [CrossRef]
19. Martín, J.C.; Roman, C. An application of DEA to measure the efficiency of Spanish airports prior to
privatization. J. Air Transp. Manag. 2001, 7, 149–157. [CrossRef]
20. Wang, C.N.; Li, K.Z.; Ho, C.T.; Yang, K.L.; Wang, C.H. A model for candidate selection of strategic alliances:
Case on industry of department store. In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Innovative
Computing, Information and Control, Kumamoto, Japan, 5–7 September 2007; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ,
USA, 2007.
21. Wang, R.T.; Ho, C.T.B.; Oh, K. Measuring production and marketing efficiency using grey relation analysis
and data envelopment analysis. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2010, 48, 183–199. [CrossRef]
22. Yuan, L.N.; Tian, L.N. A new DEA model on science and technology resources of industrial enterprises.
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Cybern. 2012, 3, 986–990.
23. Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Available online: http://www.business-week.com/ (accessed on 5 May 2014).
24. Tone, K.A. Slacks-based measure of efficiency in data envelopment analysis. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2001, 130,
498–509. [CrossRef]
25. Düzakın, E.; Düzakın, H. Measuring the performance of manufacturing firms with super slacks based model
of data envelopment analysis: An application of 500 major industrial enterprises in Turkey. Eur. J. Oper. Res.
2007, 182, 1412–1432. [CrossRef]
26. Tone, K. A slacks-based measure of super-efficiency in data envelopment analysis. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2002,
143, 32–41. [CrossRef]
27. IAS (International Accounting Standards). Available online: http://www.iasplus.com/en/standards/ias
(accessed on 20 May 2014).
28. Stevenson, W.J.; Sum, C.C. Operations Management: An Asian Perspective; McGraw-Hill Education (Asia):
Singapore, 2010.
29. Golany, B.; Roll, Y. An application procedure for DEA. Omega 1989, 17, 237–250. [CrossRef]
30. Pruessner, J.C.; Kirschbaum, C.; Meinlschmid, G.; Hellhammer, D.H. Two formulas for computation of the
area under the curve represent measures of total hormone concentration versus time-dependent change.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 2003, 28, 916–931. [CrossRef]
31. Lo, F.Y.; Chien, C.F.; Lin, J.T. A DEA study to evaluate the relative efficiency and investigate the district
reorganization of the Taiwan power company. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 2001, 16, 170–178. [CrossRef]
© 2016 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
249
sustainability
Article
Does Business Model Affect CSR Involvement?
A Survey of Polish Manufacturing and
Service Companies
Marzanna KatarzynaWitek-Hajduk and Piotr Zaborek *
Institute of International Marketing and Management, Collegium ofWorld Economy,
Warsaw School of Economics, 162 Niepodległo´sci Ave.,Warsaw 02-554, Poland
* Correspondence: piotr.zaborek@sgh.waw.pl; Tel: +48-502119774
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 27 November 2015; Accepted: 12 January 2016; Published: 15 February 2016
Abstract: The study explores links between types of business models used by companies and
their involvement in CSR. As the main part of our conceptual framework we used a business
model taxonomy developed by Dudzik and Witek-Hajduk, which identifies five types of models:
traditionalists, market players, contractors, distributors, and integrators. From shared characteristics
of the business model profiles, we proposed that market players and integrators will show
significantly higher levels of involvement in CSR than the three other classes of companies.
Among other things, both market players and integrators relied strongly on building own brand value
and fostering harmonious supply channel relations, which served as a rationale for our hypothesis.
The data for the study were obtained through a combined CATI and CAWI survey on a group of
385 managers of medium and large enterprises. The sample was representative for the three Polish
industries of chemical manufacturing, food production, and retailing. Statistical methods included
confirmatory factor analysis and one-way ANOVA with contrasts and post hoc tests. The findings
supported our hypothesis, showing that market players and integrators were indeed more engaged in
CSR than other groups of firms. This may suggest that managers in control of these companies could
bolster the integrity of their business models by increasing CSR involvement. Another important
contribution of the study was to propose and validate a versatile scale for assessing CSR involvement,
which showed measurement invariance for all involved industries.
Keywords: business models; CSR; sustainable development; medium and large companies; Poland
1. Introduction
The concepts of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) and business models have been frequently
addressed in academic studies in the last decades. Both of these concepts are often listed among the key
concerns in contemporary management theory and practice. They are looked at from various research
perspectives, including macroeconomic [1], microeconomic [2], management [3,4], and marketing [5].
There is no lack of conceptual studies trying to integrate CSR with developing strategies and business
models. For example, Pyszka [6] is proposing a mechanism whereby traditional business models can
be transformed into CSR-enabled ones, with the aim of enhancing a company’s competitive advantage,
in particular its innovativeness. When it comes to practical guidance for managers, some authors
developed various sets of tools that practitioners can use to diagnose the current state of CSR and
sustainability involvement and implement needed changes, bearing in mind the short- and long-term
economic benefits for the company. In this vein, Bocken et al. [7] offer a number of value-mapping tools
to support sustainable business modeling, including the interests of the four major stakeholder groups,
here labeled as environment, society, customer, and network actors. The topic of the interlink between
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93; doi:10.3390/su8020093 250 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
CSR, sustainability, business models, and strategy is also ever-present in business and trade journals,
where various authors often depict these management concepts as means of enhancing competitiveness
and achieving other benefits [8]. What these published works, both academic and otherwise, have in
common is a lack of empirical proof (as in the case of conceptual papers) or reliance on qualitative and
anecdotal evidence e.g., [9,10]. In fact, there is a surprising dearth of works exploring the quantitative
evidence for possible links between types of adopted business models and the level of CSR practices.
As such, the aim of our paper is to address this issue and attempt to bridge the knowledge gap.
Building on previous studies, we conclude that the type of business model used should affect a firm’s
CSR involvement, and then test this proposition with survey data collected from managers of medium
and large companies in Polish manufacturing and service industries.
The paper is structured as follows. First, we summarize relevant literature sources on CSR to
discuss various understandings of the concept. Next, we survey popular definitions and taxonomies
of business models. The third section looks at previous studies where associations between business
models and CSR were investigated. Then, we detail the business model definition and classification
adopted in this paper and set out the rationale for our hypotheses. The methods section comes next,
followed by findings. The paper concludes with a discussion of theoretical and practical implications
of the study, limitations, and suggestions for further research.
2. Corporate Social Responsibility in Literature
Corporate Social Responsibility and related concepts (e.g., sustainable development) have been
playing an increasingly prominent role in recent years, both in economic and academic research.
Despite its popularity—and perhaps in part because of it—authors of numerous publications in this
area have not shown a uniform understanding of these constructs, which are sometimes vague and
tends to vary from publication to publication. This is reflected in how many distinct terms were
used, including Corporate Sustainability and Responsibility, Corporate Citizenship, Corporate Social
Rectitude, Corporate Social Performance, Corporate Social Responsiveness, Social Performance, or
Sustainable Responsible Business. In fact, in a review of the CSR literature Dahlsrud [11] counted no
fewer than 37 different definitions of the concept. Below we shortly outline the history of the idea of
sustainable responsibility and wrap up by offering the definition that we assumed in our study.
In terms of social duties of business, for many years the dominant perspective was that of
Friedman [12], who maintained that what firms should care for was generating profits, and social
responsibilities were no concern of business; indeed, his strongly held conviction was that any action
on the part of managers that did not amount to increased profits was tantamount to theft. However, the
notion of firms supporting social goals is not new, since the first publications on this topic appeared
in the 1930s, e.g., [13,14], and the first formalized definitions date back to the 1950s–60s [15–20].
Rapid growth in CSR has been particularly evident since the 70s, when accelerating globalization made
the impact of companies on society and environment a more pertinent problem than ever before [21].
At that time, it was proposed that CSR could offer effective solutions for outstanding societal issues, in
large part due to the strong effects of businesses, in particular multinationals, on economy, politics,
environment, and local communities [22]. In the 1980s the idea of sustainable development emerged to
represent such “development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of
the future generations to meet their own needs” [23]. Its proponents advocate sustainable development
in economy, society, and the natural environment that would aim to eradicate poverty and moderate
excessive consumption in both developed and developing countries [24]. As noted by Vos [25], many
definitions of sustainability are similar in that they identify three aspects of the term: economic, social,
and environmental.
The growing importance of CSR was recognized by the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO), which set up a special task group for social responsibility. As a result of
the group’s work, a system of guidelines was revealed in 2010 to help businesses operate in a more
“ethical and transparent way that contributes to the health and welfare of society” [26]. The ISO 2600
manual outlines specific benefits that can be derived from implementing CSR principles, including
enhancing competitive advantage; attracting and retaining employees, shareholders, and clients;
251
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
improving the morale, commitment, and productivity of employees; and fostering better image and
goodwill from clients, suppliers, local communities, and other stakeholders of the company.
The first definition of CSR that gained wide acceptance was that of Caroll [27]. Caroll proposed
a CSR pyramid with four levels representing CSR dimensions: (1) economical (at the base of the
pyramid; denoting all activities yielding profit for the company’s owners), (2) legal (acting within
the law regulating environmental protection, consumer and employee relations, and adhering to
contractual agreements), (3) ethical (acting in an ethical and honest way towards stakeholders), and
(4) philanthropic (the firm as a good citizen should undertake special programs for the benefit of
the society). Later on, Schwartz and Caroll [28], building on the previous model, came up with a
non-hierarchical structure with only three dimensions—economical, legal, and ethical—whereby the
philanthropic element was split between economical and ethical areas, depending on the dominant
underlying motivations behind specific charitable activities. Another popular conceptualization of
CSR, known as the triple bottom line (TBL), calls for companies to operate in ways that are socially
responsible, eco-friendly, and economically valuable [29]. The three focal points of TBL are people
(involving responsible business practices towards employees, customers, society at large, and local
communities), the planet (activities aimed at protecting the natural environment), and economic value,
or profits earned after contributing to the other two CSR dimensions. According to the TBL perspective,
its three dimensions are equal in terms of importance, which should be reflected in corporate reporting.
Therefore, not only financial metrics should be reported, but also accounts of the company’s social
and ecological performance. Such integrative reports should merge both short-term and long-term
perspectives [30]. One of the most recent outlooks on CSR and the last one reviewed in this section is
that of Chen andWongsurawat [31], whose definition we chose to adopt in our research. These authors
looked to combine Caroll’s [27] perspective and TBL with the ISO recommendations. In their view
CSR should encompass: (1) competitiveness (i.e., cooperation with stakeholders in building strong
market position of the company and its products); (2) transparency (removing barriers for members of
the public to accessing corporate information; the aim here is to provide means for fast and efficient
communication with a wider audience on the firm’s activities with potential social and environmental
impacts); (3) responsibility (complying with legal regulations and contractual terms pertaining to
different stakeholder groups); (4) accountability (making thoughtful and justified business decisions
accommodating the interests of various groups of stakeholders).
To sum up the discussion so far on popular conceptualizations of CSR, and to present our own
understanding of the concept used in this work, we distinguish the following four aspects of the
CSR involvement: (1) value chain relations (entailing conscientious attitude in interactions with
suppliers, customers, and other supply chain partners); (2) community relations (communication,
cooperation, and support for local and wider social partners); (3) natural environment (commitment to
running business operations with the smallest possible negative impacts on the environment); and
(4) employee relations (all corporate socially responsible activities aimed at employees). In keeping
with the above taxonomy of CSR, we developed a Likert-type scale for use in the survey questionnaire.
The measurement scale was outlined in more detail in the methods section.
3. Overview of Conceptualizations of Business Models
The interest in business models has grown, particularly since the 1990s, when a number of seminal
papers were published. The dominant theme for many papers was Internet business, which coincided
with—and was sparked by—the dot-com boom and bust, e.g., [32–35]. Academic writing on business
models, even more so than on CSR, is affected by a lack of consensus as to what constitutes a business
model. So far many definitions and typologies had been proffered, some more popular than others,
but no single dominant approach emerged. On the other hand, and quite similar to CSR, most views
of business models have considerable overlap, which makes it easier and more meaningful to compare
findings across different works. In this section we summarize the more popular ways to think about
business models, and present our own approach that was used in the questionnaire design to collect
responses from managers.
252
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
One way to look at business models was offered by Afuah and Tucci [33], who proposed that
it is how a firm builds up and deploys its resources to provide customers with products of value
superior to competitors’ offerings in order to generate profits. According to Linder and Cantrell [36], a
business model is a logical basis for creating a company’s value , reflected in a coherent action plan
aimed at developing a strategy that meets customer expectations through the optimal use of resources
and relations. Here, a business model specifies such elements as: types of customers, products or
services, pricing policy, customer benefits, distribution channels, unique competences, and revenue
sources. Betz [37] considers a business model as a composition of three elements necessary for the
firm to operate: benefits or values for customers and business partners, revenue sources, and logistics
arrangements. Osterwalder et al. [38] give the following constituting elements of business models
as part of their strategic template for crafting new or documenting existing business models: value
proposition for customers, corporate infrastructure (including key activities, key resources, and partner
network), targeted customers (composed of market segmentation, distribution channels, and customer
relationships), cost structures, and revenue streams.
In terms of business model typologies, many authors propose divergent classifications based
on different sets of criteria, with many of them mostly relevant to e-business [32,33,35,39–42]. Just a
handful of authors attempted to develop a more universal typology system, suitable for classifying a
wider range of business models, including traditional, “bricks-and-mortar” companies [36,37,43–46].
4. Earlier Studies on the Links between Business Models and CSR
Even though the problem of how companies with different types of business models get involved
in CSR has arguably both practical and theoretical merits, it has rarely been explored as a topic
of an academic study. Some authors proposed to introduce new paradigms in management to
effectively counteract social and environmental degradation, e.g., [47–50], but only a few incorporated
elements of business models in their analyses of CSR, e.g., [51–54]. In recent years, several new
pertinent management concepts emerged, such as so-called “sustainable business models” [55–57],
“sustainability business models” [58], “business models for sustainability” [51], and “sustaining supply
chain management” [59–61]. All of these new constructs build on the theory of corporate sustainability
management, which—at a general level—aims to integrate multiple corporate activities and impacts in
societal, environmental, and economic areas. Those authors give different definitions of sustainable
business models (SBM); for example, they say that it is “a model where sustainability concepts are the
driving force of the firm and its decision making” [58], or ”a new model of the firm where sustainability
concepts play an integral role in shaping the mission or driving force of the firm and its decision
making” [62]. Regarding the interplay between business models and CSR, some authors suggest
the existence of a feedback loop, whereby certain types of business models can foster stronger CSR
involvement [63], while implementing CSR has the potential to transform business models in the
long run [53]. In the same vein, Schaltegger andWagner [64] observe that business models of firms
following CSR principles are changing both through purposeful effort and unconscious adjustments.
This points to the conclusion that not only strategic management but also daily operational tasks are
factors in shaping a business model setup. This view finds support in Elkington [55], who noted that
business models are determinants of organizational behaviors, and as such have influence on strategic
management as well as operations, including assorted CSR activities. The literature, but also more
casual observations and common experience, imply that sustainable management, CSR, and business
models are in constant interaction, and firms intending to improve their CSR metrics have to work
towards revising their business model [65]. Indeed, deep changes to a business model can be a way of
achieving radical improvement to a firm’s CSR status through creating more environmental and social
value in an economically viable manner [58,66,67], or—to put it another way—capturing economic
value while generating social and environmental values [7]. Accordingly, the concept of business
models could be a useful tool for reconciling and integrating the often divergent needs and wants of
stakeholders in terms of the sustainable development of a company [68]. For that purpose, firms should
make a conscious effort to plan and manage the sustainability aspects of their business models [51].
253
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
In light of the above, it seems relevant to study links between various types of business models and
the CSR record of companies, since there is a good theoretical reason to believe that different business
models yield different CSR attitudes and implementations. As such, we propose that:
Hypothesis 1: The intensity of CSR involvement is related to the business model followed by
a company.
The second hypothesis for the study will be developed in the following sections of the paper.
5. Business Model Definition and Taxonomy Adopted in the Study
As the theoretical background for our approach to defining and classifying business models
we used a framework developed by Dudzik and Witek-Hajduk [69], with further extensions and
modifications by Goł˛ebiowski et al. [46]. According to the framework, a business model represents
the logic underlying a firm’s business activities in a given area and encompasses a description of the
value proposition offered by the firm to its customer groups, with a specification of essential resources,
processes (activities), and external relationships of the firm, serving to build, offer, and deliver the
value proposition, ensure the firm’s competitiveness, and enhance its equity. The “area of activity”
referred to in the definition, depending on the scope of operations, can concern the whole of a company
or an individual strategic business unit (SBU); thus a firm can operate distinct business models in
various SBUs at the same time. Goł˛ebiowski et al. [46] point to the following constituting elements
of a business model: (1) value proposition to the customer, comprising products offered, benefits
delivered at different steps of the transaction process, subjective customer assessment of the acquired
benefits versus incurred costs, and relationships with final consumers/users of the products; (2) key
resources of the company, such as managerial competences, technology, brands, patents, designs,
tools, equipment, infrastructure, and market knowledge; (3) the firm’s role within the value chain, in
particular activities within its internal value chain and their ties with external links of the integrated
value chain; (4) revenue sources from selling manufactured goods and rendered services, offering rights
to tangible and intangible products through leasing, renting, franchising or licensing, subscription and
usage-based fees, and brokerage fees from performing the role of an intermediary for other companies.
Employing this concept of a business model, Dudzik and Witek-Hajduk [69] conducted a survey
of Polish companies to arrive at a segmentation of business models that identified five distinct types of
firms: (1) traditionalists, (2) market players, (3) contractors, (4) distributors, and (5) integrators.
Table 1 details the distinguishing features of each type of a business model. These descriptions
were presented to managers participating in our study so they could choose the one category that was
most consistent with their company.
Table 1. Characteristics of business models in the study.
Business Model Business Model Description
Traditionalist
The main source of value for customers is functional benefits from products,
and the relationship of these benefits to costs. The firm does not have unique
resources (e.g., a strong brand, patents, designs, technology, and/or recipes).
The internal supply chain is long (R&D, production, marketing, sales and
after-sales services). Most of the revenues are sales of manufactured products.
Market player
Customers derive most of the value from functional benefits offered by
products, as well as the strength of the brand and relationships with other
members of the value chain. The firm deploys its unique resources, such as
advanced technologies, strong brand, patents, unique designs and recipes, and
managerial skills. The internal supply chain is long (R&D, production,
marketing, sales and after-sales services). A market player tends to be the
leader of its supply chain. Revenues are mostly obtained through the sale of
self-manufactured products, supplemented by income from licensing
technology, brand names and franchising.
254
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
Table 1. Cont.
Business Model Business Model Description
Contractor
The value proposition for customers is mostly based on offering functional
product benefits. The main asset of the company is its production facility and
equipment, which it employs to manufacture products on contract for other
businesses. Its internal supply chain is focused on the production function.
Proceeds from manufacturing contracts account for the bulk of the revenues.
Distributor
The value proposition here relies on a favorable relation of functional and
emotional benefits of products to their costs. The key distinguishing
competency of the company is market knowledge (about suppliers and
customers). The internal supply chain is short and focused on the sales function.
Revenues are mostly earned through fulfilling the role of a trade intermediary.
Integrator
Customer benefits can come from favorable functional features of products, but
also from a strong brand and cohesive partner relationships with members of a
supply chain. The distinguishing attributes of an integrator are managerial
competences, management information systems, recipes, designs, patents,
brand names, and market knowledge. Its internal supply chain is short: as the
supply chain leader, an integrator is focused on a few core competences, such as
R&D, designing, marketing, sales and after-sales services, while it tends to
outsource manufacturing. Income is generated through sales of its own
brand-name products and offering its own unique know-how and technology
by means of franchising and/or licensing.
Source: Own elaboration based on Dudzik and Witek-Hajduk [69].
From the salient features of various types of business models, as outlined in Table 1, one can
reasonably expect considerable differences in the extent of CSR implementation. In seems that out of
the four groups of criteria used in the segmentation procedure yielding the above classification, those
that are likely to have the strongest bearing on CSR compliance are value proposition, key resources,
and the role of a company within its supply chain. Arguably, no salient elements of sustainable
business are conditional on a particular setup of revenue sources, so any differences in this regard
should be of no consequence to the CSR standing of a company.
Value propositions of market players and integrators are set apart from those of other companies
not only by unique combinations of functional features, but also an emphasis on developing strong
brand names and cohesive relationships with channel partners. In the current state of the economy
in Poland, similar to other developed and emerging countries, consumers in many market segments
have been growing ever more sensitive to the ethical behavior of the firms they patronize. As such,
these groups of consumers may derive distinctive utility from the fact that their purchasing decisions
can support the good citizens among available suppliers of goods and services. On the other hand,
firms that aggressively seek to increase the perceived value of their offerings, which are market
players and integrators, may choose to get involved in CSR programs specifically for that reason.
Consequently, these firms are apt to promote their brands more frequently through charitable programs,
whereby, for example, customers can feel better knowing that a part of the paid price goes to support
a socially valuable cause. In the same vein, market players and integrators may also see business
rationale in establishing and financing charitable foundations, and implementing changes to their
core processes (e.g., phasing in eco-friendly technologies) to make assertions of responsible behavior
more credible. To further strengthen their case, they also may choose to encourage employees to get
involved with local communities to assist in enhancing their capabilities to satisfy salient infrastructural,
educational, cultural, and sports-related needs. If that was indeed the main motivation to get involved
in CSR, companies might be inclined to follow up this initial actions by overhauling their employee
relations and organizational culture—this way employees can become more involved and convinced
of the true and honest nature of the managerial push towards sustainable and responsible business
practices. With more involved employees it is arguably easier to make a company’s CSR claims seem
255
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
more genuine to its customers, which can foster higher loyalty and greater sales. Quite naturally,
the other business models—traditionalists, contractors, and distributors—with their lower interest in
creating strong brands will not experience the same motivation, and therefore may display weaker
CSR involvement.
Another distinctive feature of market players and integrators is their reliance on unique resources
to underlie their competitive advantages. Among these resources are superior managerial competences,
innovative and productive organizational culture, proprietary technology, and market knowledge.
Many of these capabilities have better chances of being achieved in corporate settings where employees
are loyal, highly motivated, and emotionally involved with their workplace. Such conditions are
among the likely benefits of implementing CSR programs aimed at improving employee relations,
which is another reason to believe that these two business models will show higher CSR ratings.
In terms of a value chain position and relations, market players and integrators follow more active
and “social” policies as compared to other categories of firms. Here, the goals and ways of operating
create a strong incentive to develop close partnerships with other crucial supply chain members so that
market players and integrators could assume the role of a dominant value chain member. This role is
critical to their business strategies, which rely on the ability to shape value chains to achieve a higher
level of efficiency and effectiveness than the networks controlled by competitors. One of the main
prerequisites to achieving such a goal is a high level of trust and commitment among cooperating
firms, which is promoted by ethical and responsible behavior from all involved parties. As such, this
is another reason to expect more social responsibility (this time aimed at business partners) among
market players and integrators than other firms with business models less dependent for success on
the quality of everyday channel relations.
To conclude, considering the attributes of the identified types of business models and relating
them to the CSR dimensions, it is possible to propose which types of companies will be most likely to
operate in the manner consistent with the principles of responsible business. In particular, it can be
expected that market players and integrators show higher levels of CSR implementations. On the other
hand, the attributes of traditionalists, contractors, and distributors could create less of an incentive to
function in a more sustainable way.
Consequently, it is possible to supplement the previous general hypothesis with a more
specific proposition:
Hypothesis 2: Among the five types of business models, the highest level of CSR involvement
will be found in market players and integrators.
The other possible distinctions between business models are difficult to extrapolate from an a
priori analysis based on previous research, conceptual papers, and the authors’ own observations
and experiences.
The empirical part of the research was dedicated to validating the two hypotheses. The methods
employed and obtained outcomes are described next.
6. Methods
The study involved a net sample of 385 mangers from medium and large enterprises, who
were contacted through a combination of CATI and CAWI methods. In particular, the respondents
answered via phone (the CATI part) while looking at the web-based version of the questionnaire (the
CAWI component). The inclusion of the web component was essential to make respondents fully
understand the rather lengthy business model characteristics presented in Table 1, and choose the
model that best described their firms. The respondents were initially contacted via an e-mail outlining
the research project, inviting them to participate, and offering a link to a dedicated web-page with a
digital questionnaire. Within a few days of receiving the e-mail, phone calls followed during which
interviews were conducted or arrangements were made to set up a later interview date. Despite several
contact attempts, not all selected sample members could participate: the gross sample initially drawn
256
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
from a database encompassing almost all companies in Poland was 535, which amounted to a response
rate of 72%.
The final (net) sample included manufacturers of food (31.7%) and chemicals (31.2%), as well as
retailers and wholesalers of these products (37.1%). In terms of the number of employees, 75.3% firms
had between 50 and 249 staff, with the rest employing more than 250 people; 76.9% of the sample had
solely Polish owners, while 23.1% reported various levels of foreign ownership.
The statistical analysis in this project was twofold. First, we validated our measurement model of
CSR involvement with confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) using the AMOS 23 software. The second
step involved employing one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) as the means of testing the hypotheses
of differences between various business models in terms of CSR involvement. Here, we used five
dependent variables: one for the general level of a firm’s engagement in CSR and four depicting its
respective dimensions. The factor scores for each latent variable for every company were obtained
through a regression method from the preciously validated CFA model.
7. Research Findings
We start this section by explaining how business models were identified. Then we specify the CSR
measurement model, followed by its diagnostics and concluding with the outcomes of the ANOVA.
To determine which of the predefined business models best describes each company, managers
were offered descriptions of five distinct profiles and asked to choose only one that best portrayed
their main area of operation in Poland. Recognizing that this mode of collecting answers, if employed
over the phone, may produce biased results (due to extensive textual descriptions) respondents were
able to see the relevant parts of the questionnaire on a web page while interacting with an interviewer
through the CATI method.
English translations of characteristics of business models were presented in Table 1 earlier
in the paper. Table 2 below gives sample frequencies and percentages for the different types of
business models.
Table 2. Frequency distribution of business models in the study sample.
Business model Sample Frequency Sample Percentage
Traditionalist 168 43.6
Market player 71 18.4
Contractor 30 7.8
Distributor 66 17.2
Integrator 50 13.0
Together 385 100
Source: Own elaboration.
Considering that the studied companies were part of long-established industries, it comes as
no surprise that nearly half of them declared that they were operating according to a traditionalist
business model. The smallest number of studied firms was identified by their managers as contractors,
which is also understandable since Poland is not a very popular location for contractual manufacturing,
especially compared to East Asian countries, the long-standing providers of outsourcing services.
On the whole, the frequency of each of the subgroups was sufficient to perform reliable analysis of
variance tests—as a rule of thumb, 20 is often given as a minimum sample size per group [70].
As discussed before, the adopted understanding of social responsibility assumed that CSR
involvement is a second-order reflective construct expressed through four dimensions. The CSR
dimensions, themselves being first order reflective latent variables, were measured with five-point
Likert-scale items. The specific content of the items used in the survey questionnaire is given in the
following table. Literature sources that were used to inform the scale building choices were also
indicated in Table 3.
257
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
Table 3. Dimensionality and manifest variables in the CSR involvement model.
Item Designation in
Measurement Model Item Content Literature Sources
Latent variable: Value Chain Relations
VAL_1 We use CSR principles in selecting suppliers.
VAL_2 [71–78] We create the image of our firm, brands, and
products with reference to social values.
VAL_3 Our customers are aware that part of our product
prices supports our CSR initiatives.
VAL_4 Payments to our suppliers are made in keeping with
contractual obligations.
VAL_5 Our firm seeks to follow international standards and
certificates (e.g., ISO 26000, SA 8000, Fair Trade).
Latent variable: Community Relations
COM_1 We are involved in charitable initiatives.
[71,75,79,80]
COM_2
We have a special organizational unit (e.g., a
foundation) tasked with social and/or charitable
objectives.
COM_3 Our employees are involved in voluntary charitable
activities.
COM_4
We provide financial support to local communities in
terms of their infrastructural, cultural, educationalm
and sports-related needs.
Latent variable: Natural Environment
ENV_1 We take care to prevent events that could have
negative impacts on environment and society
ENV_2 We strive to limit our use of energy, water, and other [71,79–82]
resources.
ENV_3 We use recycling and try to limit our waste.
ENV_4 We aim to curb our CO2 emissions.
ENV_5 We use eco-friendly technologies and materials in
our processes, products, and packaging.
Latent variable: Employee Relations
EMP_1
We have control and supervision mechanisms to
monitor, support, and enforce ethical behavior
among employees.
EMP_2 Our employees have ways to report unethical [80,83,84]
conduct without fear of retribution.
EMP_3 We have implemented procedures to enable swift
reaction against acts of breaching employee rights.
EMP_4 In our company we respect principles of diversity
management, including gender and disabilities.
EMP_5 We have implemented a system of creating good CSR
practices by employees.
EMP_6 Employees are consulted before we implement
changes in our company.
Source: Own elaboration.
258
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
The validity of the above model was tested with confirmatory factor analysis using the maximum
likelihood estimation.
Considering that the sample was composed of firms representing three distinct industries (i.e.,
food production, chemical manufacturing, and commerce, both wholesale and retail), it was essential
to test the model structure for measurement invariance. Measurement invariance is found when
all relevant subgroups could be equally well represented by the same pattern of regression weights
and covariances in the model. A common way to test for measurement invariance is to compare an
unconstrained model (assuming that all groups have all parameters estimated independently) with a
model where regression weights and covariances are set to be equal across all groups. Then chi-square
statistics are computed for alternative models and the chi-square differential is obtained. Evidence for
measurement invariance is found when the chi-square difference is insignificant [85] and so—consistent
with the principle of parsimony—the simpler (i.e., constrained) option should be retained. In the
current study, the chi-square value representing discrepancies between the two models was 47.426,
with 40 degrees of freedom and a p-value of 0.196. This implies that the model where all firms are
pooled together as a single group is superior, as the more complex solution with different parameters
across groups does not offer markedly better accuracy. From a practical perspective, our research
appears to suggest that CSR involvement (at least when measured using the metrics deployed in our
survey) is a universal characteristic reflected in a similar way (following the same structural patterns)
in firms with various backgrounds.
The resultant CFA diagram, with its standardized regression parameters and squared multiple
correlations, is depicted in Figure 1.
In order to evaluate the model fit with the sample data, we used a set of common indices as set
out in Table 4.
259
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
􀈱
Source: Own elaboration.
Figure 1. CFA model of the CSR involvement construct.
Table 4. Overall fit measures for the CFA model.
Metric Value Threshold for aWell-Fitting Model
Chi-square/df (relative chi-square) 2.326 <3 for good fit
p-value for the model <0.001 >0.05
GFI (goodness of fit index) 0.905 ě0.9
CFI (comparative fit index) 0.942 ě0.9
AGFI (adjusted goodness of fit index) 0.880 ě0.8
PCFI (parsimony comparative fit
index) 0.823 ě0.8
RMSEA (root mean square of
approximation) 0.059; HI90 = 0.066
ď0.05 for good model fit; ď0.08 for
adequate fit; in addition, the upper
90% confidence limit (HI 90) should
be no more than 0.08 for a well-fitting
model
Source: Own elaboration. Cutoff points based on Garson [86].
260
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
The above metrics indicate a close match between the model and the data. The only exception
is the chi-square test, which is significant and rejects the null hypothesis of the lack of differences
between the observed covariance matrix and the one implied by the model. However, the chi-square
statistic tends to be considerably inflated for large samples, which results in excessive sensitivity of the
test. Therefore, this measure is considered unreliable and could be disregarded if other metrics point
to a well-fitting solution [85,87], which is what happens in the current analysis.
Table 5 provides insights into CSR dimensions in terms of reliability (Cronbach’s Alpha),
convergent validity (AVE, or average variance extracted) and discriminant validity (MSV, or maximum
shared variance).
Table 5. Reliability and validity measures of CSR involvement dimensions.
Construct Cronbach’s Alpha AVE MSV
Value Chain Relations 0.839 0.596 0.345
Community Relations 0.788 0.493 0.272
Natural Environment 0.861 0.562 0.271
Employee Relations 0.896 0.583 0.345
Source: Own elaboration.
The metrics in Table 5 are implying a solution that does not reveal any apparent issues
compromising its interpretability. In particular, it seems that the manifest variables used to represent
the latent constructs have high levels of internal consistency—Cronbach’s alphas are all greater than
0.07, as suggested in Malhotra [88]. AVE values, which show how well hidden variables are represented
by their corresponding indicators, should be at least 0.5 [89], which is true for all constructs except
Community Relations; however, even there the cut-off is missed by only a small amount. As such,
Community Relations appear to explain only 49% of variance in its indicators, with the rest of the
variability accounted for by other factors outside of the model. This outcome is not entirely unexpected,
since it could easily be argued that a firm’s contributions to local communities through financial aid
or the work of its employees are strongly context-sensitive and determined—for example—by the
particular locale in which the firm operates. Naturally, these external influences seem to be quite
independent of the company’s stance on CSR.
Having concluded that the CSR involvement model is at least adequate in how it fits the collected
data, we derived from it five new variables to represent the latent constructs in further analysis.
To investigate how various business models compared in terms of CSR involvement, we
performed five one-way ANOVA tests. Each test had a different dependent variable; either the
general CSR involvement level or one of the four of its dimensions. As an independent variable, the
same factor was used in each test, which showed which of the five business models each company
followed. The outcomes of the ANOVA were given in Table 6.
261
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
Table 6. One-way ANOVA outcomes for differences in CSR involvement among business models.
Business Model N Mean Std. Error ANOVA Test Results
Overall CSR
Involvement
traditionalist 168 ´0.141 1.007
F (4;380) = 5.688 p <
0.001
market player 71 0.420 0.886
contractor 30 ´0.129 0.932
distributor 66 ´0.206 1.029
integrator 50 0.225 0.948
total 385 0.000 1.000
Employee
Relations
traditionalist 168 ´0.154 1.015
F (4;380) = 4.670 p =
0.001
market player 71 0.337 0.944
contractor 30 ´0.011 0.930
distributor 66 ´0.177 1.019
integrator 50 0.278 0.892
total 385 0.000 1.000
Community
Relations
traditionalist 168 ´0.142 0.952
F (4;380) = 5.542 p <
0.001
market player 71 0.431 0.921
contractor 30 ´0.207 0.964
distributor 66 ´0.153 1.011
integrator 50 0.190 1.095
total 385 0.000 1.000
Natural
Environment
traditionalist 168 ´0.031 1.010
F (4;380) = 3.618 p =
0.007
market player 71 0.299 0.827
contractor 30 ´0.116 1.068
distributor 66 ´0.303 1.087
integrator 50 0.150 0.924
total 385 0.000 1.000
Value Chain
Relations
traditionalist 168 ´0.109 1.011
F (4;380) = 3.212 p =
0.013
market player 71 0.353 0.851
contractor 30 ´0.175 1.018
distributor 66 ´0.084 0.994
integrator 50 0.081 1.066
total 385 0.000 1.000
Source: Own elaboration.
As evidenced in Table 6, the ANOVA tests were all significant, implying the existence of
meaningful differences among business models. This outcome supports our first hypothesis (H.1)
predicting unalike involvement in CSR from firms following dissimilar business models.
Looking at the means, it is clear that market players followed by integrators consistently had
the highest scores on the general metric of CSR, as well as on its particular dimensions. At the other
end of the spectrum were traditionalists, contractors, and distributors, with quite similar negative
averages. Considering that the basic ANOVA test only informs about the presence or lack of at least
one difference between all pairs of subgroups, to formally verify our second more specific hypothesis
we defined a specific comparison of two groups of firms using contrasts. As per the second hypothesis,
the first group consisted of market players and integrators, while the second comprised traditionalists,
contractors, and distributors. The contrast weights assigned to particular business models were as
follows: market players 3, integrators 3, traditionalists –2, contractors –2, and distributors –2. It can
be noted that the members of the same comparison groups have identical weights, and the sum of
all weights is 0, which is required from a correctly specified test. Table 7 shows the outcomes of the
contrast tests for the general CSR involvement and its respective dimensions.
262
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
Table 7. Contrast test results comparing two groups of business models in terms of CSR involvement.
CSR Metrics Value of Contrast Std. Error t df Sig. (2-Tailed)
Overall CSR Involvement 2.887 0.707 4.082 380 0.000
Employee Relations 2.529 0.710 3.559 380 0.000
Community relations 2.865 0.708 4.048 380 0.000
Natural Environment 2.245 0.715 3.142 380 0.002
Value chain relations 2.037 0.716 2.842 380 0.005
Source: Own elaboration.
As can be seen, the values of contrasts are all positive and significant, which indicates that the first
group of market players and integrators had consistently greater values on all CSR metrics then the
second group. This evidence points to the second hypothesis being correct, which in substantive terms
means that market players and integrators displayed stronger CSR involvement than other types of
business models.
To further investigate the individual pairwise differences and similarities between various
business models, it is informative to use post hoc tests, which compare individual ANOVA subgroups
while controlling for familywise error. Hence, Table 8 sets out significant post hoc tests for all possible
pairings of business models calculated with the Games–Howell procedure.
Table 8. Games–Howell multiple comparisons of business models on CSR involvement (only
differences significant at the 0.05 and 0.1 levels were included).
Dependent
Variable
Comparison Pairs of Business Models
that Best Describes Respondents’ Firms
Mean
Difference Std. Error Sig.
Overall CSR
Involvement
traditionalist market player ´0.561 0.131 0.000
market player
traditionalist 0.561 0.131 0.000
contractor 0.549 0.200 0.061
distributor 0.626 0.165 0.002
contractor market player ´0.549 0.200 0.061
distributor market player ´0.626 0.165 0.002
integrator Significant differences not found
Employee
Relations
traditionalist
market player ´0.491 0.137 0.004
integrator ´0.432 0.149 0.036
market player traditionalist 0.491 0.137 0.004
distributor 0.514 0.168 0.022
contractor Significant differences not found
integrator
market player ´0.514 0.168 0.022
integrator ´0.456 0.178 0.085
traditionalist 0.432 0.149 0.036
distributor 0.456 0.178 0.085
Community
Relations
traditionalist market player ´0.572 0.132 0.000
market player
traditionalist 0.572 0.132 0.000
contractor 0.638 0.207 0.026
distributor 0.583 0.166 0.005
contractor market player ´0.638 0.207 0.026
distributor market player ´0.583 0.166 0.005
integrator Significant differences not found
263
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
Table 8. Cont.
Dependent
Variable
Comparison Pairs of Business Models
that Best Describes Respondents’ Firms
Mean
Difference Std. Error Sig.
Natural
Environment
traditionalist market player ´0.329 0.125 0.070
market player traditionalist 0.329 0.125 0.070
distributor 0.602 0.166 0.004
contractor Significant differences not found
distributor market player ´0.602 0.166 0.004
integrator Significant differences not found
Value Chain
Relations
traditionalist market player ´0.462 0.128 0.004
market player traditionalist 0.462 0.128 0.004
distributor 0.437 0.159 0.052
contractor Significant differences not found
distributor market player ´0.437 0.159 0.052
integrator Significant differences not found
Source: Own elaboration.
At the 0.05 significance level, the Games–Howell tests confirm the earlier observation that market
players displayed the best results of all investigated business models in terms of following the CSR
guidelines, in both the general and particular sense. On the other hand, traditionalists, distributors, and
contractors showed significant discrepancies when compared to market players, but not to integrators.
The fact that market players are significantly different from all other types of business models
except integrators, coupled with the observation that there were no significant differences among
traditionalists, contractors, and distributors, lends further support to our theory-based assumption
that there were two general groups of business models in terms of adherence to the CSR principles.
A part of that proposition was already validated with the contrast tests, but post hoc tests provide
more evidence by implying that the two groups might be internally homogenous in their degrees of
CSR implementation.
8. Theoretical and Practical Implications of the Study
This study has made several valuable contributions to the theory and practice of management.
We have shown that CSR could be a universal phenomenon in that it appears in a similar manner
in manufacturing and service companies of different industries and sizes. This is not to say that all
groups of companies are the same in terms of the intensity of involvement in CSR, but rather it suggests
the same underlying mechanism governing relationships between the second-order CSR construct,
its four dimensions, and their measurable indicators. This conclusion seems to be generally in line
with many earlier works based on a case study method. Many of them are relying on the conceptual
framework of CSR with four similar dimensions that appeared to show equal relevance when applied
to firms from different industries, e.g., [7,9,10,57]. However, with survey research, due to its high
level of standardization, developing a measurement tool adequate for many types of companies is
more problematic. The previous quantitative research that we know of involved narrowly defined
industries, very often manufacturing, which amounted to relatively homogeneous samples more suited
for statistical analysis, e.g., [80,82,84]. In contrast, this current paper offers questionnaire scales with
statistical evidence, implying that the same measurement model could be used in all three industries
with similar validity and reliability. On the face of it, it would seem that firms operating in such
different contexts would display considerable dissimilarities. One source of such differences could be
in distinct legal frameworks regulating environmental issues in chemical industry, food manufacturing,
and retailing, with the chemical industry subjected to the most stringent conditions. However, most of
these differences pertain to very specific limits on emissions, use of energy and resources, and other
264
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
aspects of environmental protection, while our measurement scales ask about those things only in a
general way that seems to be applicable to all studied companies.
Arguably the most natural area where CSR could be applied in a similar fashion across all three
industries is employee relations. This is not only because of the intrinsic versatility of human resources,
which can take a similar form in many different settings, but also in large part due to the same system
of legal regulations applying to each and every firm. This comes as no surprise since “it is clear that
law and legal standards in various forms . . . play a considerable role in relation to the substance of
CSR, and for implementation and communication of CSR” [90].
Considering that the studied firms were medium and large in size, and most of those firms in
said industries in Poland are operating with various implementations of ISO systems, this could
also be a unifying factor. The ISO systems have many regulations that determine how firms should
organize their assorted functions and processes, including guidelines that are consistent with CSR
principles (e.g., environmental protection, employee relations, external stakeholder relations, value
chain cooperation). The capability of ISO standards to drive similar implementations of responsible
business practices was shown before in papers by other authors [91,92].
Given the discussion so far, it seems that our multiple measurement scale could be a versatile and
capable tool for studying CSR in companies across various business contexts.
One practical application of our outcomes could be in the area of public policy. Even though most
governments in developed countries make efforts to support responsible business standards, there
are reasons to believe that these actions have only limited effectiveness [93]. As such, our findings
suggest that local and national governments, as well as other policymakers interested in promoting
sustainable growth and ethical standards in business, should support above all enterprises operating
in line with the business models of market players and integrators. The present research indicates
that these business models are most CSR-oriented, which should bring about the best effects in terms
of—for example—environmental protection, employee relations, harmonious cooperation with local
communities, and conscientious attitude towards other stakeholders. In other words, here public
policy measures would be the most aligned with the intrinsic tendencies of these types of businesses
to act in a responsible fashion.
Another possibly useful insight for mangers is our observation that CSR involvement might
contribute to enhancing brand equity, leading to a higher brand value and increased value for
shareholders. This corroborates some earlier research, involving quantitative surveys, demonstrating
that CSR can build trust with customers, which in turn enhances corporate reputation and results
in greater brand equity [94]. This stems from the fact that market players and integrators both had
higher levels of CSR implementation, and one likely reason for that could be related to them building
stronger brands among consumers and business partners, which is among the defining features of their
business models. It should be noted, though, that this is more of a supposition than a finding based on
direct evidence. Despite a degree of uncertainty, such a relationship points to an interesting topic of a
follow-up study explicitly investigating the links between business models, CSR involvement, and
brand value.
Our research seems to substantiate a theoretical proposition of a feedback link between CSR
and business models, which can be found in many conceptual papers, e.g., [95]. According to theory
and—mostly qualitative—observations, firms that adopt successful CSR programs and initiatives tend
to experience changes in organizational culture, which becomes more CSR-oriented and promotes
further responsible corporate behaviors, including deeper structural changes to strategies and business
models [96]. This mechanism could arguably result in a self-perpetuating virtuous circle, driving
sustainability commitment to become ever deeper. Based on the current study, it can be noted that the
business models supporting CSR, and in turn being supported by it, are market players and integrators.
Their CSR metrics, markedly better than those of other types of companies, can be interpreted as
pointing to the presence of such a feedback mechanism.
265
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
The tendency of market players and integrators to act in a more socially responsible way towards
their stakeholders, including value chain members, could serve other companies as a sign of good
candidates for mutually beneficial partnerships. Indeed, it is more so because the business classification
scheme employed in the study is easy to use by practitioners, who can readily identify market players
and integrators among their potential partners.
The study findings could also provide a measure of reassurance to those consumers who are keen
to support ethical companies but are uncertain about the sincerity of their CSR claims. According to a
recent segmentation study of Polish households, those who are sensitive to cause-related marketing
and are willing to pay more for products of firms that contribute to solving relevant social problems
make up almost 30% of the adult population [97]. It seems that CSR in most active companies
(market players and integrators) is not “skin deep” but tends to be implemented quite thoroughly and
comprehensively. Therefore, it is believable that many of the CSR claims used as promotional devices
are genuine projections of strategic orientation and organizational culture values in firms with the two
most “sustainability-friendly” business models.
9. Limitations and Directions for Further Research
Similar to other projects of this kind, one rather obvious constraining feature of the study that
could limit the scope of possible generalizations is the nature of the surveyed population. It could
be contended that locating the survey in Poland in the context of the three industries can make it
problematic to infer beyond this research setting to other countries or types of companies. However, the
patterns that transpired in our data seem to be of a general nature, well grounded in theory, and
explainable in terms of their underlying causal mechanism. These likely causal mechanisms, tying up
the two types of business models with a more active stance in social responsibility, as explained earlier
in the paper, could conceivably be found in firms using the same business models from beyond our
research population. It would be, nevertheless, interesting to see if the outcomes can be replicated in
different research settings.
Another idea for supplementary research is a qualitative multiple-case study where causal
mechanisms, leading from types of business models to various levels of CSR involvement, could be
probed in depth. Such an investigation could serve to validate our literature and experience-based
suppositions about the reasons for differences between business models, and possibly identify new
patterns of relevant factors. Those new factors might involve propositions of mediating or moderating
variables that could be controlled for in survey research to outline a more complete picture of
associations between business models and CSR.
New research, in addition to including mediating and moderating variables, could also look at
financial metrics (e.g., profit margin, ROA, ROE), and how these correspond to CSR levels among firms
with different business models. It is plausible that correlations from CSR involvement to financial
outcomes might vary in significance and strength in different business model groups.
Author Contributions: Author Contributions: Most of the tasks involved in writing the paper were done jointly
by both authors. These include: developing the concept and design, analysis and interpretation, writing the article,
and its critical revision. Statistical analysis was performed by Piotr Zaborek.
Conflicts of Interest: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
References
1. Ferrrero, I.; Hoffman, M.; McNulty, R. Must Milton Friedman Embrace Stakeholder Theory? Bus.Soc. Rev.
2014, 119, 37–59. [CrossRef]
2. Moczadlo, R. Creating Competitive Advantages—The European CSR-Strategy Compared with Porter’s and
Kramer’s Shared Value Approach. Econviews 2015, 28, 243–256.
3. Nwagbara, U.; Reid, P. Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) and Management Trends: Changing Times
and Changing Strategies. Econ. Insights Trends Chall. 2013, 65, 12–19.
266
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
4. Michelini, L.; Fiorentino, D. New Business Models for Creating Shared Value. Soc. Responsib. J. 2012, 8,
561–577. [CrossRef]
5. Liu, M.T.; Wong, I.A.; Shi, G.; Chu, R.; Brock, J. The Impact of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) and
perceived brand quality on customer-based brand preference. J. Serv. Market. 2014, 28, 181–194.
6. Pyszka, A. A CSR driven innovative business model. Int. J. Contemp. Manag. 2011, 4, 98–100.
7. Bocken, N.; Short, S.; Rana, P.; Evans, S. A value mapping tool for sustainable business modelling. Corp. Gov.
2013, 13, 482–497.
8. Creasey, D. Corporate responsibility: You can’t afford to ignore it. Gov. Dir. 2015, 67, 161–163.
9. Hogevold, N. A corporate effort towards a sustainable business model: A case study from the Norwegian
Furniture Industry. Eur. Bus. Rev. 2011, 23, 392–400.
10. Pelham, F.Will sustainability change the business model of event industry? Worldw. Sustain.Tour. Themes
2011, 3, 187–192.
11. Dahlsrud, A. How corporate social responsibility is defined: An analysis of 37 Definitions. Corp. Soc.
Responsib. Environ. Manag. 2008, 15, 1–13. [CrossRef]
12. Friedman, M. The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase Its Profits. Available online:
http://www.colorado.edu/studentgroups/libertarians/issues/friedman-soc-resp-business.html (accessed
on 15 January 2016).
13. Barnard, C.I. The Function of the Executive; Harvard College: Harvard, UK, 1938.
14. Clark, J.M. Social Control of Business, 2nd ed.; Augustus M Kelley Pubs: Westport, CT, USA, 1939.
15. Bowen, R. Social Responsibility of the Businessman; Harper and Borthers: New York, NY, USA, 1953.
16. Frederick, W.C. The growing concern over business responsibility. Calif. Manag. Rev. 1960, 2, 54–61.
[CrossRef]
17. Eells, R.; Walton, C. Conceptual Foundations of Business; Richard D. Irwin, Inc., 1961.
18. Davis, K.; Blomstrom, R.L. Business and Its Environment; McGraw-Hill: New York, NY, USA, 1966.
19. Davis, K. Understanding the social responsibility puzzle: What does the businessman owe to society?
Bus. Horiz. 1967, 10, 45–50. [CrossRef]
20. McGuire, J. Business and Society; McGraw-Hill: New York, NY, USA, 1963.
21. Fitch, H.G. Achieving corporate social responsibility. Acad. Manag. Rev. 1976, 1, 38–46. [CrossRef]
22. Beesley, M.E.; Evans, T. Corporate Responsibility: A Reassessment; Croom Helm: London, UK, 1978.
23. Brundtland, G. Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development: Our Common Future.
1987. Available online: http://www.un-documents.net/our-common-future.pdf (accessed on 10 May 2015).
24. People and the planet. The Royal Society Science Policy Centre report 01/12. April 2012 DES2470. Available
online: http://www.interacademies.net/File.aspx?id=25028. 1699–1710 (accessed on 13 February 2015).
25. Vos, R.O. Defining sustainability: A conceptual orientation. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 2007, 82, 334–339.
[CrossRef]
26. ISO 2600 Guidance on Social Responsibility. 2010. Available online: http://www.iso.org/iso/
catalogue_detail?csnumber=42546 (accessed on 01 May 2015).
27. Carroll, A. The Pyramid of Corporate Social Responsibility: Toward the Moral Management of Organizational
Stakeholders. Bus. Horiz. 1991, 34, 39–48. [CrossRef]
28. Schwarz, M.S.; Carroll, A.B. Corporate social responsibility: A three-domain approach. Bus. Ethics Q. 2003,
13, 503–530. [CrossRef]
29. Elkington, J. Cannibals With Forks: The Triple Bottom Line of 21st Century Business; New Society Publishers:
Stony Creek, CT, USA, 1998.
30. Aras, G.; Crowther, D. The Durable Corporation; Gower Publishing: Farnham, England, UK, 2009.
31. Chen, C.H.; Wongsurawat, W. Core constructs of corporate social responsibility: A path analysis. Asia Pac. J.
Bus. Adm. 2011, 3, 47–61. [CrossRef]
32. Rappa, M. Managing the Digital Enterprise: Business Models on the Web. North Carolina State University,
2001. Available online: http://digitalenterprise.org/models.
33. Afuah, A.N.; Tucci, C.L. Internet Business Models and Strategies: Text and Cases; McGraw-Hill: New York, NY,
USA, 2003.
34. Applegate, L.M. E-Business Models: Making Sense of the Internet Business Landscape. In Information
Technology and the New Enterprise: Future Models for Managers; Applegate, L.M., Dickson, G.W., DeSanctis, G.,
Eds.; Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2000.
267
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
35. Applegate, L.M. Emerging E-Business Models: Lessons from the Field; Harvard Business School: Boston, MA,
USA, 2001.
36. Linder, J.; Cantrell, S. Changing Business Models: Surveying the Landscape. Accent. Inst. Strateg. Chang. 2004,
7–9. Available online: http://course.shufe.edu.cn/jpkc/zhanlue/upfiles/edit/201002/20100224120954.pdf
(accessed on 3 December 2013).
37. Betz, F. Strategic Business Models. Eng. Manag. J. 2002, 14, 21–27. [CrossRef]
38. Osterwalder, A.; Pigneur, Y.; Tucci, C. Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and Future of the
Concept. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 2005, 15, 751–775.
39. Timmers, P. Business Models for Electronic Commerce. Electron. Mark. 1998, 2, 3–8. [CrossRef]
40. Weill, P.; Vitale, M.R. Place to Space: Migrating to E-Business Models; Harvard Business School Press: Boston,
MA, USA, 2001.
41. Hartman, A.; Sifinis, J.; Kador, J. E-Biznes: Strategie Sukcesu W Gospodarce Internetowej. Sprawdzone Metody
Organizacji Przedsi˛ewzi˛e´c E-Biznesowych; K.E. Liber: Warszawa, Poland, 2001.
42. Doligalski, T.; Zaborek, P.; Roma´ nczuk, S. Value Proposition and Firm Performance: Segmentation of Polish
Online Companies. Int. J. Perform. Manag. 2015, 16, 133–148. [CrossRef]
43. Slywotzky, A.J.; Morrison, D.; Andelman, B. Strefa Zysku. Strategiczne Modele Działalno´sci; PWE: Warszawa,
Poland, 2000.
44. Chesbrough, H.; Rosenbloom, R.S. The Role of the Business Model in Capturing Value from Innovation:
Evidence from Xerox Corporation's Technology Spin-off Companies. Ind. Corp. Change 2002, 11, 529–555.
[CrossRef]
45. Malone, T.W.; Weill, P.; Lai, R.K.; D’Urso, V.T.; Herman, G.; Apel, T.G.; Woerner, S.L. Do Some Business Models
Perform Better than Others?; MIT Sloan Executive Education: Cambridge, UK, 2006.
46. Goł˛ebiowski, T.; Dudzik, T.; Lewandowska, M.; Witek-Hajduk, M.K. Modele Biznesu Polskich Przedsi˛ebiorstw;
OficynaWydawnicza SGH:Warszawa, Poland, 2008.
47. Doppelt, B. Leading Change Toward Sustainability; Greenleaf Publishing: Sheffield, UK, 2003.
48. Dunphy, D.; Griffiths, A.; Benn, S. Organizational Change for Corporate Sustainability; Routledge: London, UK,
2003.
49. Griffiths, A.; Petrick, J.A. Corporate Architecture for Sustainability. Int. J. Oper. Prod. Manag. 2001, 21,
1573–1585. [CrossRef]
50. Shrivastava, P. Ecocentric management for a risk society. Acad. Manag. Rev. 1995, 20, 118–137.
51. Lüdeke-Freund, F. Towards a conceptual framework of business models for sustainability. In Proceedings of
the Knowledge Collaboration & Learning for Sustainable Innovation Conference, Delft, The Netherlands,
25–29 Octorber 2010; Wever, R., Quist, J., Tukker, A.,Woudstra, J., Boons, F., Beute, N., Eds.; pp. 25–29.
52. Schaltegger, S.; Müller, M. CSR zwischen unternehmerischer Vergangenheitsbewältigung und
Zukunftsgestaltung. In Corporate Social Responsibility: Trend oder Modeerscheinung?; Müller, M., Schaltegger, S.,
Eds.; Oekom Publishing: München, Germany, 2005; pp. 17–35.
53. Weber, M. The business case for corporate social responsibility: A company-level measurement approach for
CSR. Eur. Manag. J. 2008, 26, 247–261. [CrossRef]
54. Seelos, C.; Mair, J. Profitable Business Models and Market Creation in the Context of Deep Poverty: A
Strategic View. Acad. Manag. Perspect. 2007, 21, 49–63. [CrossRef]
55. Elkington, J. Enter the Triple Bottom Line. In The Triple Bottom Line, Does It All Add Up?; Henriques, A.,
Richardson, J., Eds.; Earthscan: London, UK, 2004.
56. Birkin, F.; Cashman, A.; Koh, S.; Liu, Z. New Sustainable Business Models in China. Bus. Strategy Environ.
2009, 18, 64–77. [CrossRef]
57. Høgevold, N.M.; Svensson, G.; Wagner, B.; Petzer, D.J.; Klopper, H.B.; Varela, J.C.S.; Padin, C.; Ferro, C.
Sustainable business models. Balt. J. Manag. 2014, 9, 357–380. [CrossRef]
58. Stubbs,W.; Cocklin, C. Conceptualizing a ”Sustainability Business Model”. Organ. Environ. 2008, 21, 103–127.
[CrossRef]
59. Seuring, B.M.; Müller, M. From a literature review to a conceptual framework for sustainable supply chain
management. J. Clean. Prod. 2008, 16, 1699–1710. [CrossRef]
60. Ashby, A.; Leat, M.; Hudson-Smith, M. Making connections: A review of supply chain management and
sustainability literature. Supply Chain Manag. Int. J. 2012, 17, 497–517.
268
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
61. Gimenez, C.; Tachizawa, E.M. Extending sustainability to suppliers: A systematic literature review. Supply
Chain Manag. Int. Rev. 2012, 17, 531–543.
62. Wicks, A.C. Overcoming the separation thesis: The need for a reconsideration of business and society
research. Bus. Soc. 1996, 35, 89–118. [CrossRef]
63. Lüdeke-Freund, F. Business Model Concepts in Corporate Sustainability Contexts. From Rhetoric to
a Generic Template for Business Models for Sustainability. Centre for Sustainability Management,
2009. Available online: http://www2.leuphana.de/umanagement/csm/content/nama/downloads/
download_publikationen/Business_Models_for_Sustainability.pdf (accessed on 18 January 2016).
64. Schaltegger, S.; Wagner, M. Integrative management of sustainability performance, measurement and
reporting. Int. J. Account. Audit. Perform. Eval. 2006, 3, 1–19. [CrossRef]
65. Yip, G. Using Strategy to Change Your Business Model. Bus. Strategy Rev. 2004, 15, 17–24. [CrossRef]
66. Porter, M.; Kramer, M. Creating Shared Value. Harv. Bus. Rev. 2011, 89, 62–77. Available online:
http://hbr.org/2011/01/the-big-ideacreating-shared-value (accessed on 18 January 2016).
67. Yunus, M.; Moingeon, B.; Lehmann-Ortega, L. Building Social Business Models: Lessons from the Grameen
Experience. Long Range Plan. 2010, 43, 308–325. [CrossRef]
68. Osterwalder, A. The Business Model Ontology. In A Proposition In A Design Science Approach. Dissertation;
Universite de Lausanne: Lausanne, Switzerland, 2004. Available online: http://www.hec.unil.ch/
aosterwa/PhD/Osterwalder_PhD_BM_Ontology.pdf (accessed on 15 June 2015).
69. Dudzik, T.M.; Witek-Hajduk, M.K. Typologia modeli biznesu. Gospod. Materiałowa i Logistyka 2007, 9, 18–23.
70. Mooi, E.; Sarstedt, M. A Concise Guide to Market Research: The Process, Data and Methods Using IBM SPSS
Statistics, 2nd ed.; Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Germany, 2014.
71. Elkington, J. Cannibals with forks: The triple bottom line of the 21st Century Business. Environ. Qual. Manag.
1998, 8, 37–51. [CrossRef]
72. Maloni, J.M.; Brown, M.E. Corporate Social Responsibility in the Supply Chain: An Application in the Food
Industry. J. Bus. Ethics 2006, 68, 35–52. [CrossRef]
73. Hsueh, C.F.; Chang, M.S. Social Responsibility for Supply Chain Integration. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2008, 190,
116–129. [CrossRef]
74. Cruz, M.; Matsypura, D. Supply chain networks with corporate social responsibility through integrated
environmental decision-making. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2009, 47, 621–648. [CrossRef]
75. Mishra, S.; Suar, D. Does Corporate Social Responsibility Influence Firm Performance of Indian Companies?
J. Bus. Ethics 2010, 95, 571–601. [CrossRef]
76. Maignan, I.; Ferrell, O.C.; Hult, T. Corporate Citizenship: Cultural Antecedents and Business Benefits. J. Acad.
Mark. Sci. 1999, 27, 455–469. [CrossRef]
77. Baskarana, V.; Nachiappanb, S.; Rahmanc, S. Supplier assessment based on corporate social responsibility
criteria in Indian automotive and textile industry sectors. Int. J. Sustain. Eng. 2011, 4, 359–369. [CrossRef]
78. Thresh Kumar, D.; Palaniappanb, M.; Kannanc, D.; Shankara, K.M. Analyzing the CSR issues behind the
supplier selection process using ISM approach, Resources. Conserv. Recycl. 2014, 92, 268–278. [CrossRef]
79. Saleh, M.; Zulkifli, N.; Muhamad, R. Looking for evidence of the relationship between corporate social
responsibility and corporate financial performance in an emerging market. Asia Pac. J. Bus. Adm. 2011, 3,
165–190. [CrossRef]
80. Zaborek, P. CSR and Financial Performance: The Case of Polish Small and Medium Manufacturers. Int. J.
Manag. Econ. 2014, 43, 53–73.
81. Lagoarde-Segot, T. Corporate Social Responsibility as a Bolster for Economic Performance: Evidence from
Emerging Markets. Glob. Bus. Organ. Excell. 2011, 6, 38–53. [CrossRef]
82. Torgusa, N.; O’Donohue, W.; Hecker, R. Capabilities, Proactive CSR and Financial Performance in SMEs:
Empirical Evidence from an Australian Manufacturing Industry Sector. J. Bus. Ethics 2012, 109, 483–500.
[CrossRef]
83. Buciuniene, I.; Kazlauskaite, R. The linkage between HRM, CSR and performance outcomes. Balt. J. Manag.
2012, 7, 5–24. [CrossRef]
84. Tang, Z.; Eirikur, H.; Rotenberg, S. How Corporate Social Responsibility Engagement Strategy Moderates
the CSR—Financial Performance Relationship. J. Manag. Stud. 2012, 49, 1274–1303. [CrossRef]
85. Byrne, B. Structural Equation Modeling with AMOS: Basic Concepts, Applications and Programming, 2nd ed.;
Routledge: New York, NY, USA, 2010.
269
Sustainability 2016, 8, 93
86. Garson, D. Structural Equation Modeling: Statistical Association Publishing Blue Book Series; Statistical
Association Publishing: Asheboro, NC, USA, 2012.
87. Bowen, N.; Guo, S. Structural Equation Modeling: Pocket Guides to Social Research Methods; Oxford University
Press: New York, NY, USA, 2012.
88. Malhotra, N. Marketing Research: An Applied Orientation, 6th ed.; Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ,
USA, 2010.
89. Hair, J.; Black,W.; Babin, B.; Anderson, R. Multivariate Data Analysis, 7th ed.; Prentice-Hall: Upper Saddle
River, NJ, USA, 2007.
90. Buhmann, K. Corporate Social Responsibility: What role for law? Some aspects of law and CSR. Corp. Gov.
Int. J. Bus. Soc. 2006, 6, 188–202. [CrossRef]
91. Zinenko, A.; Rovira, M.R.; Montiel, I. The fit of the social responsibility standard ISO 26000 with other CSR
instruments: Redundant or complementary? Sustainability Accounting. Manag. Policy J. 2015, 6, 498–526.
92. Moratis, L.; Widjaja, A.T. Determinants of CSR standards adoption: Exploring the case of ISO 26000 and the
CSR performance ladder in the Netherlands. Soc. Responsib. J. 2015, 10, 516–536. [CrossRef]
93. Steuer, R. The Role of Governments in Corporate Social Responsibility: Characterising Public Policies in
Europe. Policy Sci. 2010, 43, 27–49.
94. Fatma, M.; Rahman, Z.; Khan, I. Building company reputation and brand equity through CSR: The mediating
role of trust. Int. J. Bank Mark. 2015, 33, 840–856. [CrossRef]
95. Maas, S.; Reniers, G. Development of a CSR model for practice: Connecting five inherent areas of sustainable
business. J. Clean. Prod. 2014, 64, 104–114. [CrossRef]
96. Calabrese, A.; Costa, R.; Menchini, T.; Rosati, F.; Sanfelice, G. Turning Corporate Social Responsibility-driven
Opportunities in Competitive Advantages: A Two-dimensional Model. Knowl. Process Manag. 2013, 20,
50–58. [CrossRef]
97. Zaborek, P.; Miro´ nska, D. Segmentation of Polish consumers based on their attitudes towards cause related
marketing. Gospodarka Materiałowa i Logistyka. PWE 2014, 10, 2–10.
© 2016 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
270
sustainability
Article
Analytical Business Model for Sustainable
Distributed Retail Enterprises in a
Competitive Market
Courage Matobobo and Isaac O. Osunmakinde *
School of Computing, College of Science, Engineering and Technology, University of South Africa, P.O. Box 392,
UNISA, Pretoria 0003, South Africa; 49116762@mylife.unisa.ac.za
* Correspondence: osunmio@unisa.ac.za; Tel.: +27-11-670-9155
Academic Editors: Adam Jabło ´ nski and Giuseppe Ioppolo
Received: 12 November 2015; Accepted: 21 January 2016; Published: 4 February 2016
Abstract: Retail enterprises are organizations that sell goods in small quantities to consumers for
personal consumption. In distributed retail enterprises, data is administered per branch. It is
important for retail enterprises to make use of data generated within the organization to determine
consumer patterns and behaviors. Large organizations find it difficult to ascertain customer
preferences by merely observing transactions. This has led to quantifiable losses, such as loss of market
share to competitors and targeting the wrong market. Although some enterprises have implemented
classical business models to address these challenging issues, they still lack analytics-based marketing
programs to gain a competitive advantage to deal with likely catastrophic events. This research
develops an analytical business (ARANN) model for distributed retail enterprises in a competitive
market environment to address the current laxity through the best arrangement of shelf products per
branch. The ARANN model is built on association rules, complemented by artificial neural networks
to strengthen the results of both mutually. According to experimental analytics, the ARANN model
outperforms the state of the art model, implying improved confidence in business information
management within the dynamically changing world economy.
Keywords: sustainable business models; retail enterprises; analytical business model; analytics;
distributed enterprises
1. Introduction
Business information (BI) analytics are groups of methodologies, organizational techniques
and tools used collectively to gain information, analyze it and predict the outcomes of solutions to
problems [1]. The field of BI analytics through the use of operational data generated from transactional
systems has given business users better insight into the problems they face [2]. These insights can assist
business users or managers to make better and informed decisions. BI analytics are commonly applied
in sustainable retail enterprises. Retail enterprises purchase goods from manufacturers or wholesalers
in large quantities. They break up the bulk and resell those goods in smaller quantities directly to
consumers. Consumers can go around the shop, pick the items of their choice from the shop shelves,
place them into their baskets and then the contents of each basket are captured into transactional
systems. These transactional systems generate data that can be used for analysis purposes. There
are two major types of retail enterprises: centralized and distributed retail enterprises. This paper
concentrates on distributed retail enterprises as a way of alleviating analytics issues of enterprises in a
competitive market environment.
A distributed retail enterprise issues decision rights to the branches or groups nearest to the data
collection [3]. Each branch can make its own decisions, depending on the data generated. A distributed
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140; doi:10.3390/su8020140 271 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
retail enterprise often maintains clustered databases for each branch for the storage of data. Data
generated in a distributed retail enterprise branch usually reflects the true customer purchasing habits
at that particular branch. Data analysis per branch might reveal better results than a centralized data
management system. It is, therefore, important to analyze data generated in each branch to realize
meaningful patterns. Analysts can apply BI analytics to branch data in order to generate meaningful
patterns for each particular branch.
Retail enterprises strive for survival in view of the current challenging sales optimization models.
These models affect product arrangements in retail enterprises, leading to a decline in sales levels [4],
high research and marketing costs, a decline in market share, wrong product target markets and
poor management decisions [5]. Figure 1 presents the quantitative impact of these challenging sales
optimization models in retail enterprises. Figure 1a shows the sales decline in Hungarian retail
enterprises in June 2013. The sales level of computer equipment and books declined drastically by
4.8%, while sales of non-food items had the lowest level of decline of 0.4%. Figure 1b shows the causes
of the reduction in sales level. The highest scoring reason for the reduction in sales was expensiveness
(48%), followed by 41% of products with features unavailable. The least common reason for a reduction
in sales was lack of functionality (20%).
Figure 1. Impact of current sales optimization models on retail enterprises. (a) reduction in retail sales.
Adapted from [6]; (b) reasons for reduction in sales. Adapted from [7].
Data quality problems also affect the quality of decisions made by managers on different levels of
a retail enterprise [5]. Poor data has caused problems in both traditional and e-business companies,
as shown in Figure 2. In both types of companies, extra cost to prepare reconciliations was seen
as the main problem caused by inadequate data. This was seen to have an impact of 58% and 57%
respectively. Inability to deliver orders or loss of sales was also a poor data quality challenge that had
a higher impact in e-business (33%) than in traditional (24%) companies. The lowest-scoring problem
caused by poor data was failure to meet a significant contractual requirement.
272
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
Figure 2. Problems caused by poor data quality. Adapted from [8].
An organization implemented an easy-to-use desktop and server analytics software program
for the development of several business units and to improve the basis for decision-making [9]. The
challenge was to test the most effective BI analytics for solving theoretical business problems. A data
consolidation project was undertaken in South Africa by Altron to organize and deliver high-quality
data successfully to its executives on their Apple iPads [10]. The smart phones’ interfaces were too small
for the style and amount of information they wanted to deliver. This approach posed the following
challenges: lack of an analytics-based marketing program, failure to make BI a “matchmaker”, lack
of business-driven analytic strategies and failure to test the most effective BI analytics for solving
theoretical business problems.
This paper develops an analytical business (ARANN) model that can be used in distributed retail
enterprises within the dynamically changing world economy to implement the best arrangement of
shelf products at each branch in order to improve the weaknesses highlighted in Figures 1 and 2.
The ARANN model is built on a machine learning technique, association rules (AR) technique,
complemented by an artificial neural network (ANN) technique to strengthen the results of the
individual models. Since sustainability in this context generally requires the ability of a business to
sustain itself in times of crisis, similar to competitive markets, ARANN has been specifically designed
for sustainable distributed and centralized retail enterprises. The major contributions in this paper are
the following:
‚ Development of a newly proposed analytical ARANN model that could intelligently assist
distributed retail enterprise management within competitive markets to arrange products
optimally on store shelves so that customers will purchase more products than planned in
order to achieve an optimal profit level.
‚ Detailed experimental evaluations conducted on the sustainable ARANN model as measures of
its performance using publicly available data and a volume of real-life retail data sets captured in
ever-changing markets.
‚ Application of a robust business model in terms of (i) deployment scenarios, (ii) distributed
and centralized analytics, (iii) time and memory scalability, and (iv) benchmark with classical
methods for ease of implementation for managerial practices in IT.
To our knowledge, not enough research has presented user-friendly models and work examples
to make technical information and BI available to professional managers. This paper is structured as
follows: Section 2 previews work done in the area of AR and ANN, Section 3 proposes an intelligent
model for distributed retail enterprises, Section 4 focuses on experimental evaluations and finally,
Section 5 concludes the paper.
273
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
2. Background Studies
2.1. Related Work
Besides the analytics software programs and projects mentioned above, classical applications of
AR and ANN are highlighted here. From the research conducted in [11], the authors applied AR to
medical data containing combinations of categorical and numerical attributes to discover useful rules
and from this experiment, useful and concise AR were discovered for prediction purposes. In [12], the
authors implemented a system for the discovery of AR in web log usage data as an object-oriented
application and discovered excellent associations within the data. They put forward “interestingness
measures” as future work. In [13], the researchers applied an AR algorithm to a large database of
customer transactions from a large retailing company to test the effectiveness of the algorithm and it
exhibited excellent performance. In the study conducted in [14], it was observed that AR is effective in
revealing associations though it does not take into account special interests. A comprehensive survey
was conducted in [15] regarding AR on quantitative data in data mining. The authors examined it
using different parameters and they concluded that the direct application of AR might produce a large
number of redundant rules. This is also supported in the article in [16].
AR was applied in [4] to a sport company struggling with the arrangement of sports items in
accordance with customer purchasing patterns. The retail company had no computerized mechanism
for providing the best item arrangement. The study was performed to identify purchasing patterns
that could be adopted by the retail enterprise. The authors analyzed historical data to identify the
associated patterns from transactional data. From the study, they found relationships between sports
items purchased and the best ways of arranging items, either side by side or in the same retail area, so
that the items were frequently purchased together to yield high sales. In this study, AR was used for
mining relationships between items purchased.
AR was applied in [11] to medical data containing combinations of categorical and numerical
attributes to discover useful rules and from this experiment, useful and concise associations were
discovered for prediction purposes. Ordonez [17] used AR to predict the level of contraction in four
arteries and risk factors. The experiment predicted accurate profiles of patients with localized heart
problems, specific risk factors and the level of disease in one artery.
ANN have been used in the past to search for patterns and predict future sales [18]. In research
conducted in [19], the authors evaluated the predictive accuracy of ANNs and logistic regression (LR)
in marketing campaigns of a Portuguese banking institution and their results showed that ANNs are
more efficient and faster than LR. In [20], the researchers applied ANNs to a Pima Indians diabetes
database and it generated rules with strong associations, thereby enhancing the decision-making
process by doctors. In research conducted in [21], ANNs were applied for retail segmentation. The
authors compared an ANN technique based on Hopfield networks against k-means and mixture model
clustering algorithms. The results showed the usefulness of ANNs in retailing for segmenting markets.
Many articles mentioned in [22] consider ANNs to be a promising machine learning technique.
In research conducted in [23], it was observed that the combination of data mining methods
and a neural network model can greatly improve the efficiency of data mining methods. Craven and
Shavlik [24] also supported ANN in data mining because of the ability to learn the target concept
better than when using data mining methods. However, they presented two limitations that make
ANNs poor data mining tools: excessive training times and incomprehensible learning. The proposed
analytical model seeks to use AR complemented by ANNs to implement the best arrangement of shelf
products, branch by branch, in order to use the cooperative result to make managerial decisions.
This research is undertaken to improve the following challenges of current sales optimization
models: lack of analytics-based marketing programs, lack of business-driven analytic strategies and
failure to leverage BI to become “matchmakers”. To our knowledge, not enough research has presented
working examples and considered non-expert users in proposing models that are user-friendly to
274
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
professional managers. Sections 2.2 and 2.3 explain the building blocks of the analytic model where
the processed data from different branches is entered.
2.2. Association Rules
AR mining is an unsupervised data mining method to find interesting associations in large sets of
data items [25]. It was originally derived from point-of-sale data that describes which products are
purchased simultaneously. AR discovers interesting associations that are often used by businesses such
as retail enterprises for decision-making purposes; an example could be to find out which products are
frequently purchased simultaneously by different customers [26]. It is one of the most common and
widely used techniques in data mining, aimed at finding interesting relations [27,28] or correlations
between large data items [29]. AR provides decision-makers at retail enterprises with marketing
insights for cross-selling by providing information about product associations [30]. The most common
AR algorithm used in market basket analysis is Apriori. However, the Apriori algorithm has an
important drawback of generating numerous candidate item sets that must be repeatedly contrasted
with the whole database [31]. We are going to use two measures to quantify the interestingness of a
rule: support and confidence.
2.2.1. Support Value
Support determines how frequently a rule is contained in a given dataset. It is defined as the
fraction of transactions that contains A Y B to the total number of transactions in the database [32]
and this can be expressed as shown in Equation (1):
SupportpA ñ Bq “ PpA Y Bq “ npA Y Bq
N
(1)
If support (AñB) is greater than or equal to the minimum support threshold (min_sup) then it is
a frequent item set. An item set is frequent if support (AñB) ě min_sup().
2.2.2. Confidence Value
Confidence is the ratio of the number of transactions containing A and B to the number of
transactions containing A, and can be further expressed as shown in Equation (2):
Con f idencepA ñ Bq “ PpB{Aq “ npA Y Bq
npAq (2)
If confidence (AñB) is greater than or equal to the minimum confidence (min_con) then we are
confident about the rule generated.
Furthermore, rules that satisfy both the minimum support threshold (min_sup) and the minimum
confidence threshold (min_con) are called strong AR. A rule is strong if support (AñB) ě min_sup ^
confidence (AñB) ě min_con. These two measures are used as inputs in the ANN technique.
2.3. Artificial Neural Networks
ANNs simulate the behavior of biological systems and are used to discover patterns and
relationships. They are useful for studying complex relationships between input and output variables
in a system [33]. The main advantage of an ANN is the ability to extract patterns and detect trends that
are too complex to be noticed by other computer techniques or humans [34]. In [35], the research done
shows that ANNs are now commonly used to solve data mining problems because of the following
advantages: robustness, self-organizing adaptiveness, parallel processing, distributed storage and a
high degree of fault tolerance. The ANN sums the inputs xi against corresponding weights wi and
compares the ANN output to the threshold value, a. The threshold is determined by the inputs used.
275
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
Let X be the net weighted input of the neuron, as shown in Equation (3). The decision of X is for
discrete cases since it takes only certain values:
X “
ÿn
i“1
xiwi (3)
where xi is the input signal, wi is the weight of input and n is the number of neurons.
If the net input is less than the threshold, the neuron output is ´1; if the net input is greater than
or equal to the threshold then the neuron is activated and the output attains a +1.
Let Y be the ANN output. The decision of Y is for continuous cases, since it can take any values in
the range. The actual output of the neuron with the sigmoid activation function is expressed as shown
in Equation (4):
Y “ 1
1` e´x (4)
3. Proposed Methodology for Sustainable Business Enterprises
3.1. Proposed System Model for Distributed Retail Enterprises
This section explores the proposed system model for BI analytics in distributed retail enterprises.
The proposed model has three layers, namely data cleaning and formatting, intelligent model and
distributed product shops, as shown in Figure 3. The data cleaning and formatting layer is found
at the bottom of the proposed model. In this proposed model, data is collected from transactional
systems branch per branch. The data is cleaned and formatted to the appropriate file type accepted
by the proposed model. Processed data is input into the ARANN model branch per branch at the
middle layer of the analytical model. The ARANN model cooperatively works between AR and ANN.
Processed data from the bottom layer is passed into the AR model and it outputs confidence and
support values. These values are passed into the ANN model as inputs in order to get the degree of
belief (DoB). The DoB of sets generated is compared to the ARANN activations set. The accepted sets
generated are applied on the top layer of the proposed model. This proposed model is deployed to
each branch and patterns are generated independently. The choice is left for every retail enterprise
branch to adopt the best results, depending on the market competitiveness and profit levels.
Figure 3. Proposed intelligent analytics-based framework.
276
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
The proposed intelligent analytics-based framework has the following benefits: reduction in risk
of passing misleading results to all branches, no one point of failure, consumption of fewer resources,
faster construction of distributed systems and no need for data integration.
This proposed analytics-based model can be implemented using the pseudo-code presented
in Table 1. Table 1 shows how ARANN generates product arrangement sets that can be used by
retail enterprise managers to arrange products on shop shelves so as to attract customers to purchase
more products than planned. The pseudo-code is further presented mathematically, as shown in
Equations (5)–(14).
Table 1. Pseudo-code for ARANN model.
Pseudo-code
Steps
Input: Transactional data in database (D) = {t1, t2, t3, .., tn}
Support ()
Confidence ()
Weights (W) = {w1, w2, w3, .., wn}
Output: Products pattern
Step 1: D = {t1, t2, t3, .., tn} //Transactions in the database
Step 2: Ck = Candidate item set of size k
Step 3: Fk = frequent item set of size k
{
for (k =1; Fk != Ø; k++) // Fk is not equal to empty set.
{
Scan the entire D to generate candidate sets Ck
{
Compare candidate support count from Ck with the minimum support
count to generate Fk
}
}
Step 4: Generate Support () & Confidence ()
{
Step 5: Input Support () & Confidence () into Neuron 1 (N1) and Neuron 2
(N2) as inputs
Step 6: Generate N1 by summing of the inputs with the corresponding
weights and apply the output into sigmoid function
Step 7: Generate N2 by summing of the inputs with the corresponding
weights and apply the output into sigmoid function
Step 8: Generate the summation of N1 & N2 after the sigmoid function and
apply the output into sigmoid function to obtain Degree of Belief (DoB)
Step 9: Display products pattern where DoB ě ARANN activation
}
}
Mathematical description for the ARANN Model
Support pSupq “ n pAuBq
N
(5)
Con f idence pConq “ n pAuBq
n pAq (6)
The sup and con values feed the N1 as the inputs and are multiplied with the
corresponding weights.
N1 “ SupW1 ` ConW3 (7)
277
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
The output of N1 after the sigmoid function
O2 “ 1
1 ` e´N2
(8)
The sup and con values feed the N2 as the inputs and are multiplied with the
corresponding weights:
N2 “ ConW4 ` SupW2 (9)
The output of N2 after the sigmoid function
O2 “ 1
1 ` e´N2
(10)
F “ W5O1 `W6O2 (11)
“ W5
1 ` e´N2
` W6
1 ` e´N2
(12)
Degree o f Belie f pDoBq “ 1
1 ` e´F (13)
Product Patterns “
#
Accepted , i f DoB ě ARANN activation
Re jected , i f otherwise
(14)
where N1 and N2 are Neuron 1 and 2 respectively; W1, W2, W3, W4, W5 and W6 are the corresponding
weights; O1 is Neuron 1 output after sigmoid function; O2 is Neuron 2 output after sigmoid function,
F is input to final Neuron and ARANN activation is the threshold value set.
3.2. Evaluation Mechanism
The purpose of model evaluation is to assess the performance of the models so as to identify the
best-performing model. To test the performance of the models, three sets were used. The confusion
matrix shown in Table 2 was used to represent actual values and predictions.
Table 2. Confusion matrix. Adapted from [36].
Predicted
Actual
True False
True a b
False c d
Error Rate “ b ` c
a ` b ` c ` d
(15)
where a is the number of sets predicted true when they are true, b is the number of sets predicted false
when they are true, c is the number of sets predicted true when they are false and d is the number of
sets predicted false when they are false. Error rate is then defined as shown in Equation (15).
3.3. Scenario—Arrangement of Products on Shelves for Distributed Retail Branches
Figure 4 shows a scenario of how the analytical model displays placement results in distributed
branches. Transactional data from each retail branch is loaded into the ARANN model to determine
the arrangement sets.
278
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
Figure 4. Intelligent Analytics-based Model for Four Branches.
Table 3. Market basket transactional data for branch 3 of a retail enterprise.
Market-basket Transaction Data—Branch 3
TID ITEMS
T300 Colgate, Vaseline, Geisha, Margarine, Bread
T301 Margarine, Bread, Coke, Colgate, Vaseline
T302 Coke, Colgate, Chocolate, Bread, Sweets, Margarine
T303 Geisha, Colgate, Chocolate, Towel, Vaseline, Sweets
T304 Colgate, Vaseline, Sweets, Chocolate, Bread, Margarine, Coke
Even weights were applied to each corresponding input to avoid bias on products. This was
obtained by dividing the count of a_union_b over a number of records within the data set, where a,
and b are different products. The following ARANN activation was used:
>= 0.75 strongly connected products (strongly accepted)
>= 0.65 moderately connected products (accepted)
< 0.65 weakly connected products (rejected)
Analysis of ARANN on tab:sustainability-08-00140-t003
{Colgate, Vaseline} => {Bread}
Support =
npA Y Bq
N
“ 3
5
“ 0.6 Confidence =
npA Y Bq
npAq
“ 3
4
“ 0.75
N1 = Supw1 + Conw3 N2 = Conw4 + Supw2
= (0.6 ˆ 0.6) + (0.75 ˆ 0.6) = (0.75 ˆ 0.6) + (0.6ˆ0.6)
= 0.81 = 0.81
O1 =
1
1` e´N1
“ 1
1 ` e´0.81
“ 0.69 O2 =
1
1` e´N2
“ 1
1` e´0.81
“ 0.69
F = w5O1 + w6O2
= (0.6 ˆ 0.69) + (0.6 ˆ 0.69) = 0.83
DoB =
1
1 ` e´F
“ 1
1` e´0.83
“ 0.70
Product pattern => 0.70 >= 0.65
Therefore it is moderately connected and is accepted.
279
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
{Coke} => {Bread}
Support =
3
5
“ 0.6 Confidence =
3
3
“ 1.0
N1 = (0.6 ˆ 0.6) + (1.0 ˆ 0.6) N2 = (1.0 ˆ 0.6) + (0.6 ˆ 0.6)
= 0.96 = 0.96
01 =
1
1 ` e´0.96
“ 0.72 O2 =
1
1` e´0.4
“ 0.72
F = w5O1 + w6O2
= (0.6 ˆ 0.72) + (0.6 ˆ 0.72) = 0.86
DoB =
1
1 ` e´86
“ 0.70
Product pattern => 0.70 >= 0.65
Therefore it is moderately connected and is accepted.
Table 4. Market basket transactional data for branch 4 of a retail enterprise.
Market-basket Transaction Data—Branch 4
TID ITEMS
T400 Maize meal, Beef, Fish, Cooking oil, Soups, Bread, Coke
T401 Cooking oil, Beans, Beef, Soups, Maize meal
T402 Rice, Fish, Soups, Cooking oil, Bread
T403 Fruits, Coke, Bread, Milk, Chocolate, Soups
T404 Bread, Beef, Fruit, Coke, Sweets, Maize meal
Analysis of ARANN on tab:sustainability-08-00140-t004
{Maize meal} => {Beef}
Support =
3
5
“ 0.6 Confidence =
3
3
“ 1.0
N1 = (0.6 ˆ 0.6) + (1.0 ˆ 0.6) N2 = (1.0 ˆ 0.6) + (0.6 ˆ 0.6)
= 0.96 = 0.96
01 =
1
1 ` e´0.96
“ 0.72 O2 =
1
1` e´0.4
“ 0.72
F = w5O1 + w6O2
= (0.6 ˆ 0.72) + (0.6 ˆ 0.72) = 0.86
DoB =
1
1 ` e´86
“ 0.70
Product pattern => 0.70 >= 0.65
Therefore it is moderately connected and is accepted.
{Chocolate} => {Towel}
Support =
1
5
“ 0.20 Confidence =
1
3
“ 0.33
N1 = (0.20 ˆ 0.20) + (0.33 ˆ 0.20) N2 = (0.33 ˆ 0.20) + (0.20 ˆ 0.20)
= 0.11 = 0.11
O1 =
1
1 ` e´0.11
“ 0.53 O2 =
1
1` e´0.11
“ 0.53
F = (0.2 ˆ 0.53) + (0.2 ˆ 0.53) = 0.212
DoB =
1
1` e´0.212
“ 0.55
Product pattern => 0.55 < 0.65
Therefore it is weakly connected and is rejected.
4. Experimental Evaluations: Results and Discussions
4.1. Experimental Setup
Real-life data was collected from a retail enterprise situated in South Africa with several branches
nationwide. The data for the experiments was collected from only eight branches within different
demographics of a developing country. The retail enterprise has database servers at each branch for
280
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
the storage of data. Real-life datasets consisting of 66 records were taken from each branch, to be
used for running experiments. In the experiment, the 11 most frequently purchased products were
considered. This data was collected for research purposes. The data was then exported to notepad
application for storage. Each row in Tables 5–7 represents a transaction performed by the customer.
Tables 5 and 6 show samples of real-life data from different branches.
In the public dataset 1000 transactions were used. This data set was randomly broken up into
five chunks representing branches and the records for each branch contained 200 transactions. The
data was saved in .txt format. The public data set in Table 7 is found in [37]. The data contains the
following products: bread, beer, tea, wine, orange juice, chocolate milk and canned soup.
Table 5. Sample of real-life data for branch 1.
Body lotion Colgate Rice Maize meal
Meat Rice Roll on Cooking oil Body lotion
- - - - - -
Drink Roll on Mince Coke Colgate Perfume
Table 6. Sample of real-life data for branch 2.
Bread Sugar Rice Meat Salt Cooking oil Flour Soup
- - - - - - - -
Fruits Sugar Meat Cooking oil Salt Soap Bread
Table 7. Sample of public data [37].
Fish Orange juice Tea Wine Peanuts Canned soup Bread Beer
- - - - - - - -
Cookies Fish Orange
juice Tea Wine Peanuts Canned
soup
Chocolate
milk
Perl programming language was used to implement the ARANN model. Notepad was used as
the text editor and results were displayed through the command prompt. Figures 5 and 6 show sample
sets generated by the ARANN model using a real life dataset and public dataset respectively.
Figure 5. ARANN rules on real-life data.
281
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
Figure 6. ARANN rules on public dataset.
4.2. Experiment 1: Observations of ARANN with Varying Activation in Distributed Analytics
In this experiment, Equation (14) was used to determine the decisions to be applied to Tables 8–11
of the analytical model. This analytical model accepts product patterns defined in Equation (14)
and uses the following ARANN activations: DoB < 60%, 60% >= DoB < 70% and DoB >= 70%. The
analytical model rejects arrangement sets where the DoB is less than 60% and accepts arrangement sets
between 60% and 69%, while those with a DoB greater or equal to 70% are strongly accepted. To make
the decision, ARANN compares the DoB value generated with the ARANN activations and a decision
is made. Managers use the decision to determine how products are to be arranged in each branch.
Table 8. Real-life ARANN results for branch 1.
Dataset Branch 1
Patterns Generated DoB ARANN Cooperative Decision with
60 >= DoB < 70 DoB >= 70
Roll on, perfume => Colgate 0.71 N/A Strongly accepted
Colgate, Body lotion => roll-on 0.69 Accepted N/A
Colgate => Body lotion 0.71 N/A Strongly accepted
Bread, Milk => Eggs 0.70 N/A Strongly accepted
Rice, Maize meal => soup 0.62 Accepted N/A
Bread => Drink 0.79 N/A Strongly accepted
Bread => Sugar 0.76 N/A Strongly accepted
Using ARANN activation of DoB >= 70, the following sets from Table 8 are strongly accepted:
{Roll-on, Perfume => Colgate}, {Colgate => Body lotion}, {Bread => Drink} and {Bread => Sugar}; these
are strongly connected products. Using ARANN activation of 60 >= DoB < 70, the following examples
of sets from Table 8 are accepted: {Colgate, Body lotion => Roll on}, {Rice, Maize meal => Soup} and
{Rice => Soup}; these are moderately connected products. The choice is left to every retail enterprise to
adopt either moderately or strongly connected products, depending on the market competitiveness
and profit levels. Note that the analytical model rejects the sets with DoB < 60 (i.e., weakly connected
products), which are not included. One can see in Table 8 of branch 1 that the “strongly accepted”
products at higher activation implies that some specific toiletry products are strongly connected, while
bakery products and refreshments are strongly connected at this branch.
Table 9. Real-life ARANN results for branch 2.
Dataset Branch 1
Patterns Generated DoB ARANN Cooperative Decision with
60 >= DoB < 70 DoB >= 70
Meat, Salt => Cooking_oil 0.64 Accepted N/A
Meat => Salt 0.71 N/A Strongly Accepted
Bread, rice => Eggs 0.66 Accepted N/A
Bread => Lotion 0.65 Accepted N/A
Bread => Eggs 0.65 Accepted N/A
282
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
Applying ARANN activation of DoB >= 70, the following “strongly accepted” set is generated;
{Meat => Salt}; these are strongly connected products. When ARANN activation of 60 >= DoB < 70
is used, the following examples of sets are accepted in Table 9: {Meat, Salt => Cooking oil}, {Bread,
Rice => Eggs} and {Bread => Eggs}; these are moderately connected products. It is up to the retail
enterprise’s decision-makers to adopt either moderately or strongly connected products, depending
on the market competitiveness and profit levels. On the other side, the analytical model rejects the sets
with DoB < 60 (i.e., weakly connected products), which are not included. It can be seen in Table 9 of
branch 2 that the “strongly accepted” products at higher activation implies that some specific meat
products are strongly connected with salt products at this branch.
Table 10. Public DATA ARANN results for branch 3.
Dataset Branch 1
Patterns Generated DoB ARANN Cooperative Decision with
60 >= DoB < 70 DoB >= 70
Fish, Canned soup =>Wine 0.64 Accepted N/A
Fish => Canned soup 0.74 N/A Strongly Accepted
Tea, Cookies => Peanuts 0.61 Accepted N/A
Bread => Chocolate milk 0.73 N/A Strongly accepted
Bread, Chocolate milk => Tea 0.64 Accepted N/A
Beer => Tea 0.67 Accepted N/A
Beer => Chocolate milk 0.69 Accepted N/A
Wine => Beer 0.69 Accepted N/A
Canned soup => Bread 0.79 N/A Strongly Accepted
Orange juice => Bread 0.73 N/A Strongly Accepted
Peanuts, Bread => Canned soup 0.67 Accepted N/A
Tea, Bread => Orange juice 0.65 Accepted N/A
When ARANN activation of DoB >= 70 is applied, the following “strongly accepted” sets
from Table 10 are generated: {Fish => Canned soup}, {Bread => Chocolate milk} and {Canned
soup => Bread}; these products are strongly connected. Using ARANN activation of 60 >= DoB
< 70, the following are examples of “accepted” sets that are generated in Table 10: {Fish, Canned
soup => Wine}, {Tea, Cookies => Peanuts} and {Wine => Beer}; these are moderately connected
products. Every retail enterprise is left with the choice to adopt either moderately or strongly connected
products, depending on the market competitiveness and profit levels. Note that the analytical model
rejects the sets with DoB < 60 (i.e., weakly connected products), which are not included. In Table 10
of branch 3, one can see that the “accepted” product sets at moderate activation implies that some
specific beverages are moderately connected at this branch.
Table 11. Public data ARANN results for branch 4.
Dataset Branch 1
Patterns Generated DoB ARANN Cooperative Decision with
60 >= DoB < 70 DoB >= 70
Fish, Canned soup =>Wine 0.64 Accepted N/A
Fish => Canned soup 0.74 N/A Strongly Accepted
Tea, Cookies => Peanuts 0.61 Accepted N/A
Bread => Chocolate milk 0.72 N/A Strongly Accepted
Bread, Chocolate milk => Tea 0.66 Accepted N/A
Beer => Tea 0.67 Accepted N/A
Beer => Chocolate milk 0.67 Accepted N/A
Wine => Beer 0.70 N/A Strongly accepted
Canned soup => Bread 0.80 N/A Strongly accepted
Orange juice => Bread 0.73 N/A Strongly accepted
Peanuts, Bread => Canned soup 0.68 Accepted N/A
Tea, Bread => Orange juice 0.67 Accepted N/A
283
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
In Table 11 the following “strongly accepted” sets were generated using ARANN activation of
DoB >= 70: {Bread => Chocolate milk} and {Fish => Canned soup}, which are strongly connected
products. Using ARANN activation of 60 >= DoB < 70, the following example of sets from Table 11
were accepted: {Fish, Canned soup => Wine}, {Orange juice => Bread} and {Tea, Bread => Orange
juice}, which are moderately connected products. The decision-makers of every retail enterprise are
left with the choice to adopt either moderately or strongly connected products, depending on the
market competitiveness and profit levels. Note that the analytical model rejects the sets with DoB < 60
(i.e., weakly connected products), which are not included. In Table 11 of branch 4 one can see that the
“strongly accepted” product sets at higher activation implies that some specific bakery products are
strongly connected with dairy products at this branch.
4.3. Experiment 2: Performance Evaluations of ARANN in Comparison with Classical Methods
Table 12 shows the error rate of the individual AR and ANN techniques against the analytical
model. Equation (15) is used to determine the error rate of each technique. The column “No. of
patterns” indicates the number of sets evaluated. The column “Correctly classified sets” is composed
of sets the analytical model predicted as true when they were actually true (a) and sets predicted
as false when they were actually false (d), as shown in Table 2. The column “Incorrectly classified
sets” is composed of sets the analytical model predicted as false when they were actually true (b)
and sets predicted as true when they were false (c). Randomly generated sets were used to evaluate
the performance of the three models. For example, in Branch 1 (real life), 10 rules where used in AR:
five rules were predicted as true when they were actually true (a); two were predicted as false when
actually false (d); three were predicted as true when actually false (c) and 0 were predicted as false
when actually true (b). From the results displayed in Table 12, it is clear that the analytical model
(ARANN) has a lower error rate compared to the individual classical methods.
Table 12. Quantitative evaluations of the cooperative model in distributed branches.
Dataset Algorithms No. of
Patterns
Correctly
Classifies sets
(a, d)
Incorrectly
Classified sets
(b, c)
Error Rate
Real life Branch 1
(66 Records)
AR 10 7 3 30%
ANN 10 6 4 40%
ARANN 6 5 1 17%
Branch 2
(66 Records)
AR 10 8 2 20%
ANN 10 8 2 20%
ARANN 7 6 1 14%
Public Branch 3
(200 Records)
AR 10 8 2 20%
ANN 10 6 4 40%
ARANN 6 5 1 17%
Branch 4
(200 Records)
AR 10 8 2 20%
ANN 10 7 3 30%
ARANN 8 6 2 25%
4.4. Experiment 3: Comparing Performance of Distributed and Centralized Retail Analytics
This research compares the performance of the analytical model in a distributed retail enterprise
with a centralized retail enterprise. In the distributed retail enterprise, a computer was used to
represent a branch and the time taken by the analytical model to generate arrangement patterns was
observed. Figure 7a shows raw integration time. Figure 7b shows the time of response (ToR) taken by
the analytical model to integrate a number of records from various workstations. Figure 7c shows the
ToR taken by the analytical model to generate patterns in distributed and centralized retail enterprises.
284
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
Figure 7d shows the ToR taken by the analytical model to generate product arrangement patterns
across different data sizes.
Figure 7. Comparison of the performance of ARANN in distributed and centralized retail enterprises.
From the experiment conducted, it was observed that the analytical model performs faster in
distributed retail enterprises than in centralized retail enterprises, as shown in Figure 7c. The analytical
model takes more time to generate patterns in a centralized retail enterprise than in a distributed
retail enterprise. The ToR to integrate data depends on the number of records being integrated. The
more records, the more time is needed to integrate those records. This was observed in Figure 7b. In
addition, the performance time taken by the analytical model depends on the size of the data set being
used. The analytical model’s performance is affected by the size of the data set, as shown in Figure 7d.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, a sustainable model was proposed that can be used in distributed retail enterprises
in an ever-changing economic environment to address the current laxity through the best arrangement
of shelf products branch by branch. It can intelligently assist distributed retail enterprise management
to arrange products optimally on shelves of shops so that customers will purchase more products
than planned, in order to achieve an optimal profit level. The analytical model takes branch data and
processes the data to determine the best ways of arranging items on the shelves of a retail enterprise
branch by branch. It is built on AR, complemented by ANN.
The proposed analytical model for sustainable business in distributed retail enterprises was
developed. A logical demonstration of working scenarios and experiments of the proposed analytical
model for management practices in distributed retail enterprises was presented. This was done by
inputting support and confidence values from the AR technique into the ANN technique in order to
get DoB values of the analytical model. The analytical model accepts product patterns with a DoB
greater than or equal to ARANN activation.
In the proposed analytical model performance evaluation experiment, ARANN proved to be
better than the classical methods because of its lower error rate, implying improved confidence in
the decision-making process in a competitive environment. To get the best results, the weights of the
neurons need to be determined appropriately and the quality of data needs to be improved. The DoB
values of the analytical model can sometimes be affected by the weights used.
It was observed that sets generated in a distributed retail enterprise portray the real purchasing
habits of customers per branch better than in a centralized retail enterprise. In this research, real
285
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
life datasets from eight branches of a retail enterprise and public datasets were used to conduct
the experiments.
Observations of our distributed BI analytics model are: the proposed model retains complete
control of product pattern generation, arrangement sets generated by the analytical model show a
lower error rate (Table 12), they reveal the real buying habits of each branch, the model reduces the
risk of passing misleading results to all branches (Tables 8–11) and the software runs a single process;
there is no need for data integration (Figure 3). In addition, the ARANN incorporates the strengths of
the AR and ANN models, improves generation of product arrangement sets, has the ability to discover
complex nonlinear associations discreetly among different products, effects a reduction in poor data
quality problems and losses, as well as an improvement in the effectiveness of current product sales
optimization models. Since sustainability in this context generally requires the ability of a business to
sustain itself in times of crisis, similar to competitive markets, ARANN has been specifically designed
for sustainable distributed and centralized retail enterprises.
In future, we wish to; (i) improve on ARANN performance by considering nature-inspired
algorithms; (ii) investigate a standard method of selecting the threshold; and (iii) integrate a
sophisticated learning algorithm into ARANN. The strategy and observations in this research are
therefore good for addressing challenges in an ever-changing economic environment.
Acknowledgments: Acknowledgments: The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support and resources
made available by the University of South Africa, South Africa.
Author Contributions: Author Contributions: All authors contributed equally to this article. They have read
and approved the final manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Trkman, P.; McCormack, K.; de Oliveira, M.P.V.; Ladeira, M.B. The Impact of Business Analytics on Supply
Chain Performance. Decis. Support Syst. 2010, 49, 318–327. [CrossRef]
2. Kohavi, R.; Rothleder, N.; Simoudis, E. Emerging Trends in Business Analytics. Commun. ACM 2002, 45,
45–48. [CrossRef]
3. Velu, C.; Madnick, S.; van Alstyne, M. Centralizing Data Management with Considerations of Uncertainty
and Information-Based Flexibility. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 2013, 30, 179–212. [CrossRef]
4. Abbas, W.; Ahmad, N.; Zaini, N. Discovering Purchasing Pattern of Sport Items Using Market Basket
Analysis. In Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Advanced Computer Science Applications
and Technologies (ACSAT), Kuching, Malaysia, 23–24 December 2013; pp. 120–125.
5. Haug, A.; Zachariassen, F.; van Liempd, D. The Costs of Poor Data Quality. J. Ind. Eng. Manag. 2011, 4,
168–193. [CrossRef]
6. Halford, Q.; Staff, S. Gap Cost Key Categories Billions. Furniture/Today, 3 September 2001, 14.
7. Hungary retail sales down in June. Regional Today, 26 August 2013, 1.
8. Data Quality. Controller’s Report; EBSCOhost: Ipswich, MA, United States, 2001; Volume 7, p. 7.
9. Stoodley, N. Democratic Analytics: A Campaign to Bring Business Intelligence to the People. Bus. Intell. J.
2012, 17, 7–12.
10. Briggs, L. Case Study. Bus. Intell. J. 2011, 16, 39–41.
11. Aldosari, B.; Almodaifer, G.; Hafez, A.; Mathkour, H. Constrained Association Rules for Medical Data.
J. Appl. Sci. 2012, 12, 1792–1800.
12. Dimitrijevi´c, M.; Bošnjak, Z.; Cohen, E. Web Usage Association Rule Mining System. Interdiscip. J. Inf. Knowl.
Manag. 2011, 6, 137–150.
13. Agrawal, R.; Imieli ´ nski, T.; Swami, A. Mining Association Rules between Sets of Items in Large Databases.
In Proceedings of the 1993 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data,Washington,
DC, USA, 25–28 May 1993; pp. 207–216.
286
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
14. Klemettinen, M.; Mannila, H.; Ronkainen, P.; Toivonen, H.; Verkamo, A.I. Finding Interesting Rules from
Large Sets of Discovered Association Rules. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management, Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 29 November–2 December 1994;
pp. 401–407.
15. Gosain, A.; Bhugra, M. A Comprehensive Survey of Association Rules on Quantitative Data in Data Mining.
In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Conference on Information & Communication Technologies (ICT), JeJu
Island, Korea, 11–12 April 2013; pp. 1003–1008.
16. Xu, Y.; Li, Y. Generating Concise Association Rules. In Proceedings the Sixteenth ACM Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management, Lisbon, Portugal, 6–10 November 2007; pp. 781–790.
17. Ordonez, C. Association Rule Discovery with the Train and Test Approach for Heart Disease Prediction. Inf.
Technol. Biomed. 2006, 10, 334–343. [CrossRef]
18. Vornberger, O.; Thiesing, F.; Middleberg, U. Short Term Prediction of Sales in Supermarkets. In Neural
Networks, Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference, Perth,WA, USA, 27 November–1 December
1995; pp. 1028–1031.
19. Koç, A.; Yeniay, Ö. A Comparative Study of Artificial Neural Networks and Logistic Regression for
Classification of Marketing Campaign Results. Math. Comput. Appl. 2013, 18, 392–398.
20. Anbananthen, S.; Sainarayanan, G.; Chekima, A.; Teo, J. Data Mining using Artificial Neural Network Tree.
In proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Computers, Communications and Signal Processing
with Special Track on Biomedical Engineering (CCSP), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 14–16 November 2005;
pp. 160–164.
21. Boone, D.; Roehm, M. Retail Segmentation using Artificial Neural Networks. Int. J. Res. Mark. 2002, 19,
287–301. [CrossRef]
22. Cerny, P. Data Mining and Neural Networks from a Commercial Perspective. In Proceedings of the ORSNZ
Conference Twenty Naught One, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand, 30 November–1
December 2001.
23. Arockiaraj, C. Applications of Neural Networks in Data Mining. Int. J. Eng. Sci. 2013, 3, 8–11.
24. Craven, M.W.; Shavlik, J.W. Using Neural Networks for Data Mining. Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 1997, 13,
211–229. [CrossRef]
25. Cios, K.; Pedrycz, W.; Swiniarski, R.; Kurgan, L. Data Mining a Knowledge Discovery; Springer: New York, NY,
USA, 2007.
26. Berry, M.; Linoff, G. Data Mining Techniques for Marketing, Sales, and Customer Relationship Management; Wiley:
Indianapolis, IN, USA, 2004.
27. Liu, H.; Su, B.; Zhang, B. The Application of Association Rules in Retail Marketing Mix. In Proceedings
of the 2007 IEEE International Conference on Automation and Logistics, Jinan, China, 18–21 August 2007;
pp. 2514–2517.
28. Chen, M.; Chiu, A.; Chang, H. Mining Changes in Customer Behavior in Retail Marketing. Expert Syst. Appl.
2005, 28, 773–781. [CrossRef]
29. Zhao, Y. R and Data Mining: Examples and Case Studies; Academic Press: New York, NY, USA, 2012.
30. Ahn, K. Effective Product Assignment Based on Association Rule Mining in Retail. Expert Syst. Appl. 2012,
39, 12551–12556. [CrossRef]
31. Dhanabhakyam, M.; Punithavalli, M. An Efficient Market Basket Analysis based on Adaptive Association
Rule Mining with Faster Rule Generation Algorithm. SIJ Trans. Comput. Sci. Eng. Its Appl. 2013, 1, 105–110.
32. Kotsiantis, S.; Kanellopoulos, D. Association Rules Mining: A Recent Overview. GESTS Int. Trans. Comput.
Sci. Eng. 2006, 32, 71–82.
33. Poh, H.; Jasic, T. Forecasting and Analysis of Marketing Data Using Neural Networks: A Case of Advertising
and Promotion Impact. In Proceedings of the the 11th Conference on Artificial Intelligence for Applications,
Los Angeles, CA, USA, 20–23 February 1995; pp. 224–230.
34. Mistry, J.; Nelwamondo, F.; Marwala, T. Estimating Missing Data and Determining the Confidence of
the Estimate Data. In Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Machine Learning and
Applications ICMLA ’08, San Diego, CA, USA, 11–13 December 2008; pp. 752–755.
35. Nirkhi, S. Potential Use of Artificial Neural Network in Data Mining. In Proceedings of the the 2nd
International Conference on Computer and Automation Engineering (ICCAE), Singapore, 26–28 February
2010; pp. 339–343.
287
Sustainability 2016, 8, 140
36. Witten, I.; Frank, E.; Hall, M. Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, 3rd ed.; Morgan
Kaufmann: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2011; pp. 403–440.
37. Informatics. Available online: http://www.informatics.buu.ac.th/~ureerat/321641/Weka/Data%20Sets/
supermarket/supermarket_basket_transactions_2005.arff (accessed on 21 January 2014).
© 2016 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
288
sustainability
Article
CSR Reporting Practices of Polish Energy and
Mining Companies
El˙zbieta Izabela Szczepankiewicz 1,* and Przemysław Mu´cko 2,*
1 Department of Accounting, Pozna´n University of Economics and Business, Al. Niepodległo´sci 10,
61-875 Pozna´ n, Poland
2 Faculty of Economics and Management, University of Szczecin, ul. A. Mickiewcza 64,
71-101 Szczecin, Poland
* Corespondence: elzbieta.szczepankiewicz@ue.poznan.pl (E.I.S.); mucko@wneiz.pl (P.M.);
Tel.: +48-91-444-1944 (P.M.)
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 31 December 2015; Accepted: 22 January 2016; Published: 29 January 2016
Abstract: Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) reporting receives much attention nowadays.
Communication with stakeholders is a part of assumed social responsibility, thus the quality of
information disclosed in CSR reports has a significant impact on fulfilment of the responsibility.
The authors use content analysis of selected CSR reports to describe and assess patterns and structure
of information disclosed in them. CSR reports of Polish companies have similar structures at a
very high level of analysis, but a more detailed study reveals much diversity in approaches to the
report’s content. Even fairly similar companies may devote significantly different amounts of space
to the same issue. The number of similar stakeholders varies irrespectively of the company’s size.
Considerable diversity of reporting patterns results from the nature of CSR reporting, because
it concerns highly entity-specific issues. Thus, such considerable diversity is not surprising.
However, many initiatives and efforts are devoted to greater comparability of reporting, so a greater
degree of uniformity can be expected. Similar conclusions may be drawn from integrated reports’
analysis, though a small sample reflects the relative novelty of this trend.
Keywords: corporate social responsibility; sustainability reports; corporate financial statement;
integrated reporting
1. Introduction
The basis of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) is the idea of sustainable development.
Initially, CSR was interpreted in terms of economic development that respects environmental
preservation and protection. Sustainable development is understood as overall socio-economic
development integrating economic, political, social and environmental objectives. There are many
different approaches to interpreting sustainable development. According to Garriga and Melé [1],
most of the current CSR theories are focused on one of the four main aspects:
(1) meeting economic objectives that secure long-term profits (instrumental theories)
(2) using business power in a responsible way (political theories)
(3) integrating social demands (social integration theories)
(4) contributing to a good society by doing what is ethically correct (ethical theories)
Although these four approaches do not form a convenient framework for empirical research, an
immediate question arises as to which of these forms prevails in practice: whether CSR is necessary to
generate long-term profits, or to achieve other aims, or perhaps it reflects a natural tendency for social
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126; doi:10.3390/su8020126 289 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
integration. The answer depends on the quality of CSR reports, as they are part of the social dialog
between a company and its stakeholders. The scope of CSR reports consists of three main elements,
i.e., economic, social and environmental disclosures. As such, CSR reporting is very broad and may be
viewed as very ambitious. The question arises as to whether such broad objectives are being fulfilled.
The aim of the article is to provide an input into the wide strand of research on evaluation of CSR and
similar reporting, which in the paper is limited to Polish companies.
2. CSR Reporting
Initially elusive, eclectic and without strict boundaries [2], CSR became more concrete after
incorporation into the political and legislative activities of the EU. The EU Commission’s approach
to CSR has changed from rather conceptual to more prescriptive. Once defined as a concept of
voluntary integration of social and environmental concerns into companies’ business operations and
their interaction with their stakeholders, in the new strategy for CSR it was defined simply as “the
responsibility of enterprises for their impacts on society” [3]. According to the EU Commission, socially
responsible companies have to implement processes that ensure integration of social, environmental,
ethical, human rights and consumer concerns into their business operations and strategy, which
depends on close collaboration with their stakeholders.
Adaptation to CSR models is mainly driven by a new type of consumer that is sensitive to
non-financial outcomes of business activities and, if properly informed, forces companies to integrate
non-financial stakeholder interests into core strategy and operations [4,5]. The necessity for proper
consumer information lies at the top of EU priorities [3].
Communication is an essential part of corporate social responsibility. In the case of socially
responsible companies, reporting is not just a faithful representation of business activities to inform
interested parties that the organization’s behaviour is in accordance with stakeholder interests.
CSR reporting is per se part of fulfilment of social responsibility obligations. It is part of a social dialogue
that in itself is an indispensable part of social responsibility. Moreover, since not all stakeholders take
part in governance processes, their engagement and satisfaction is maintained through appropriate
communication channels.
Thus, the shift toward CSR approaches to business is accompanied by a similar move in reporting.
CSR or sustainability reports serve the purpose of disseminating information to stakeholders and the
public (see Figure 1).
Business􀈱model􀈱 Economic􀈱model􀈱 􀈱 Corporate􀈱social􀈱responsibility􀈱model􀈱
􀈱 􀈱 􀈱 􀈱
Reporting􀈱model􀈱 Financial􀈱reporting􀈱 􀈱 CSR􀈱reporting􀈱/􀈱Integrated􀈱reporting􀈱
Figure 1. The parallel shift in business and reporting models.
Through these reports, organizations fulfil the dual purpose of communicating CSR and
being accountable [6]. In the traditional model of business, corporations’ goals are measured with
financial performance indicators, such as profits, market value, and dividends. Socially responsible
organizations need new measures with a broader scope of outcomes and impact on the environment.
A triple bottom line is a popular proposition that assumes the necessity of measuring also social and
environmental outcomes.
The triple bottom line is a handy catch phrase, also referring to another simple abbreviation “3P”,
i.e., profits, people, planet. Although the necessity of assessing outcomes according groups represented
by the three Ps is not controversial, the term TBL has been criticised. A critical point is aimed at
the presumed similarity of the triple bottom line to the first bottom line, although such a similarity
seems impossible. Financial measures are calculated with a degree of precision that is not possible
in the social and environmental area. Besides, there are many trade-offs among various stakeholders
within the “people” and “planet” bottom line that are even more difficult to assess and reflect in a
290
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
single indicator. Thus, the TBL is useful rather as a rhetorical phrase to form and maintain a broader
perspective in decision making processes [7,8].
Due to varied informational needs and behaviours of stakeholders, CSR communication may
be performed through many channels. However, written reports are preferred by stakeholders over
other possible means [9]. The advantage of written reports comes from formal tools and mechanisms
that ensure reliability. Various regulations, guidelines, and standards help stakeholders obtain access
to reliable information. The best known initiatives aimed at improving CSR reporting or integrated
reporting include [10]:
‚ IFAC Sustainability Framework 2.0 (2012)
‚ ESG Framework (2011) and KPIs for ESG (2009)
‚ Prince of Wales’ Accounting for Sustainability’s Connected Reporting Guidance (2009)
‚ SustainAbility Global Reporters Program (2010)
‚ AccountAbility’s AA1000 Standards (2008)
‚ ISO 26000—Guidance on social responsibility (2010, 2012)
‚ IRCSA—Framework for Integrated Reporting (2011)
‚ Guidelines of Global Reporting Initiative (GRI): G 3-1 (2011) and G 4 (2012)
‚ The International Framework Integrated Reporting of International Integrated Reporting Council
(IIRC) (2013)
The list gives an impression of a plethora of initiatives with a common (or at least similar)
aim. However, nowadays, the most prominent and widely used framework is the Global Reporting
Initiative [11,12]. GRI is an international independent, non-governmental organization that aims at
assisting other organizations, both businesses and governments, in understanding and communicating
these organizations’ impact on critical sustainability issues. The best known GRI product is the
Sustainability Reporting Standards, used by thousands of companies around the world.
In spite of many advantages, GRI reporting receives also some criticism. According to some
research, companies that prepare reports in accordance with GRI do not necessarily behave in a
responsible way [13]. Boiral [14] reports that 90% of significant negative events were not disclosed
in sustainability reports, which is a serious violation of the balance principle of GRI guidelines.
Moreover, the concept of GRI reporting framework is not consistent with the essence of sustainability
development, as the former is aimed at an organizational level, and the latter is relevant to the
planet [15].
Nevertheless, GRI reporting is useful for research purposes, since it improves comparability of
information which is otherwise difficult to compare. Since efficient communication of organizational
behaviour is dependent upon comparability of reports, the GRI framework is used in the empirical
part of this research.
3. Demand for Research on CSR Reporting of Polish Mining and Energy Companies
Mining and energy sectors are generally known for environmental and social issues. The case
of Polish industries seems even more complicated. Poland is the world’s 17th biggest emitter of CO2
from fuels, and the fifth in the EU [16]. The environmental issues in Poland are reinforced by the
country’s strong reliance on coal energy [17]. About 86% of total gross power generation comes from
coal and coal products [18]. The coal energy industry is under strong pressure resulting from EU
climate targets. The pressure has further influence on mining and energy companies and their social
and environmental impacts. Moreover, these two Polish industries are still characterized by inefficient
human resource strategies and out-dated operating practices [19], which means that these industries
may face additional tensions in their relations with societal stakeholders in the future.
Corporate social responsibility, and particularly CSR reporting and communication, is a method
to mitigate social and environmental problems in these industries [20,21]. Although Poland may rather
291
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
be seen as a regular case in this regard, authors believe that there is a particular demand to study and
improve CSR reporting in mining and energy industries in this country.
4. Literature Review of Empirical Research
Corporate social responsibility and sustainability reporting draw much attention from the
academic community, which results in a broad strand of literature on theoretical aspects of the
issue and empirical findings. However, for the purposes of this paper, there are several studies which
are relevant.
Roca and Searcy’s [12] study focused on the use of indicators in CSR and similar reports. On the
basis of 94 reports, they demonstrated a wide usage of various CSR indicators; they found nearly
600 indicators in these reports. Generally, a great variety of indicators were disclosed, although few
were used more commonly, i.e., in nearly half of all reports (indicators relating to funding, donations,
sponsorship and community investments, greenhouse gas/CO2 equivalent emissions and the total
number of employees). The indicators evenly represented three bottom line elements (i.e., economic,
social, and environment). The study also proved the importance of the GRI reporting framework.
Gamerschlag, Möller and Verbeeten [22] sought for determinants of social and environmental
disclosures of the biggest German public companies (80 companies). They used a number of keywords
to assess the level of CSR reporting and found that it was correlated with the company’s visibility,
shareholder structure, and relationships with US shareholders.
Boiral’s [14] study shows that contrary to the principles of GRI standards, 90% of negative
information was not disclosed or was reported only partially (104 of 116 negative events identified in
their study and affecting the reporting entities). Most of the 23 companies presented an exaggerated
image of their positive achievements, virtuous commitments and external awards. Given the sensitive
nature of engagement from stakeholders, such an overoptimistic and overemphasized image of a
company in CSR reports may in fact undermine the credibility of stakeholder dialogue.
There are few empirical analyses of annual reports of Polish companies focusing strictly on CSR
reporting. Mu´cko [23] carried out a content analysis of narrative reporting of public food processing
companies. Although this research had broader aims, it demonstrated very limited presence of
CSR issues. About 1% of information in narrative reports related to the environment, employees or
customers, or suppliers (grammatical sentences were the unit of analysis). Szadziewska [24] analysed
a wide spectrum of communication channels (websites, annual reports, environmental reports, and
CSR and sustainability reports), but focused strictly on environmental disclosures. She revealed
that companies generally disclosed information about the environment, although most of them did
not measure their environmental performance. She concluded that companies would rather use
this information to create a positive image of themselves than to provide relevant, credible and
comprehensible information to its stakeholders. In more recent research on CSR relevant disclosures
of selected Polish public companies, she divided companies disclosing CSR information into three
groups, i.e., companies that: (1) disclose only regulation compliance issues, (2) provide information
also on social problems and their solutions, and (3) publish much information relevant to CSR [25].
Many articles provide a basic description that enables assessing the popularity of CSR reporting in
Poland [26–29].
5. Concept of the Structure of Integrated Reports of Socially Responsible Companies in Poland
The specific nature of CSR reporting in Poland includes independently developed models
presented in research literature. J. Samelak [30] proposed a model-based approach to the structure of
integrated reports of socially responsible companies that makes up for the imperfections of financial
reporting. The structure of the integrated report is divided into two parts: financial and non-financial.
The first part includes traditional annual financial statements with the opinion of an auditor. The other
part of the integrated report includes an activity report and a report on intangible resources and social
292
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
responsibility activities omitted from the financial part. The integrated report should integrate financial
information with non-financial information from both parts of the report.
Table 1 presents elements of integrated reports of socially responsible companies in Poland.
Table 1. Structure of integrated reports of socially responsible companies in Poland.
Structure of the
Integrated Report
Non-Listed Polish Companies Reporting
in Accordance with Domestic Regulations
Listed Polish Companies Preparing
Integrated Reports in Accordance
with IFRS
Financial part
(1) Introduction to the
financial statements
(2) Balance sheet
(3) Profit and loss statement
(4) Statement of changes in equity
(5) Cash flow statement
(6) Additional notes, excluding
information on employment and
managing and supervisory bodies
(7) Opinion and report of an auditor
(1) Introduction to the report
(2) Statement of financial position
(3) Comprehensive income statement
(4) Statement of changes in equity
(5) Cash flow statement
(6) Additional notes to the financial
statements excluding information on
employment and managing and
supervisory bodies
(7) Opinion and report of an auditor
Non-financial part
(1) Activity report according to the
National Accounting Standard (NAS)
No. 9, including business risk
information and other information
required by:
‚ Accounting Act
‚ Listed Companies Code
‚ Stock exchange regulations for
listed companies
(1) Management Commentary, including
information required by other legal
regulations (Accounting Act, Listed
Companies Code, stock exchange
regulations for listed companies)
(2) Clear explanation of the connection between presented non-financial information
with financial information disclosed in the financial part, including presentation of
financial results
(3) Company’s social responsibility strategy
(4) Information on the effect of the company’s activity on the natural environment
(5) Information on the company’s social involvement
(6) Information on intellectual capital, including data on organization capital, relational
capital and human capital, as well as data excluded from additional notes
on employment
(7) Information on managing and supervisory bodies (including standing committees)
(8) Information on independent, third-party audit of the second part of the integrated
report together with an audit report.
Source: own work based on [30–36].
The IFRS conceptual framework stipulates that the basic features of financial statements include
relevant and faithful representations of information. The basic features are supplemented by additional
features: comparability, verifiability, timeliness, comprehensibility. Many authors treat the above
classification of features as a basis for formulating a conceptual framework for integrated reports.
Sometimes, they also point out additional features. Szczepankiewicz [10] considers timeliness to be
a basic feature (next to relevance and faithful representation), because information should reach the
stakeholder in order to factor into decision making. Integrated reports are useful to stakeholders if
they are delivered on time and prepared in a reliable manner, i.e., if they faithfully represent the reality.
An integrated statement should contain relevant and complete information and should take into
account stakeholders’ expectations regarding the scope of delivered information. On the basis of the
basic elements of the annual financial statements, a stakeholder (a professional analyst) can recognize
a number of risks related to the organization’s assets, financial condition and financial results.
293
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
Nowadays, mining and energy companies are faced with the challenge of responding to the
growing demand for energy, while simultaneously improving air quality, reducing emissions and
tackling climate change and shrinking resources. Therefore, introducing non-financial information
and environmental indicators into integrated reports is seen as a positive move and denotes a growing
interest in environmental issues (including in particular negative environmental impacts of the
organization) among stakeholders. In accordance with the CSR concept, the non-financial part of the
integrated report presents performance indicators in the following categories: economic, environmental
and social aspects of activity (Table 2).
Table 2. Areas of presentation of performance indicators in Polish companies in the following categories:
economic, environmental and social aspects of activity.
Performance Indicators by Category Presentation of Results by Area:
(1) Economic aspects of activity
Corporate financial results:
‚ market presence
‚ profit
‚ sales volume
‚ rate of return from dividend investment
‚ equity, liabilities and their interest rates
‚ market share; brand strength
‚ expenditures on research and development
‚ taxes paid, tax reliefs enjoyed
‚ wages
‚ cash flows
‚ local supplies
‚ market practices; corruption
‚ economic policy
‚ court cases
‚ corporate governance
‚ other issues disclosed by economic or ratio analysis
(2) Environmental aspects of activity
Results in the following areas:
‚ raw materials
‚ products and services
‚ natural resource consumption
‚ energy consumption
‚ water consumption
‚ compliance with regulations
‚ transportation
‚ adherence to environmental regulations
‚ air and water pollution
‚ biodiversity
‚ greenhouse gas emissions
‚ solid and liquid waste
‚ noise
‚ vibrations
‚ waste management
‚ reduction of packaging
‚ radioactivity
‚ recycling
‚ use of renewable materials and resources
‚ soil contamination and erosion
‚ chemical spillage
‚ ozone-depleting substances
‚ genetic modifications
‚ animal rights
‚ protection of endangered species
294
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
Table 2. Cont.
Performance Indicators by Category Presentation of Results by Area:
(3) Social aspects of activity
Results in the following areas:
‚ employment
‚ wage policy
‚ employee education and training
‚ personnel relations in the organization
‚ health and safety
‚ employee programs
‚ additional benefits
‚ diversity of employees, diverse and equal
opportunities, combating discrimination
‚ equal pay for equal work
‚ human rights
‚ discrimination on race, gender, age
‚ anti-mobbing policy
‚ freedom to join unions and associations
‚ right to collective bargaining
‚ relationships with trade unions
‚ severance policy
‚ forced labor
‚ child labor
‚ public procurement and investments
‚ free competition infringement
‚ corruption
‚ compliance with regulations
‚ customers’ health and safety
‚ fair promotion and labeling of products
‚ product quality and safety
‚ product availability for the disabled and the poor
‚ socially responsible sales and marketing
‚ customer privacy protection
‚ marketing communication
‚ participation in public life
‚ diversity of suppliers
‚ support for social initiatives and local communities
‚ donations to charity
‚ other issues reflecting the specific nature of
the organization
Source: own work based on [26,29].
An integrated report should constitute a comprehensive and coherent document divided into
a number of parts (chapters), linking non-financial data (including data from the activity report,
ESG reports and intellectual capital reports) with financial data (from the financial statements).
The integrated report should integrate the content and GRI indicators with the content of the activity
report—particularly as regards content required by applicable Polish laws. Both the financial and the
non-financial part of the report should include references and relationships between financial and
non-financial information. A concept of the integrated report elements is presented in Figure 2.
295
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
􀈱
􀈱 Integrated􀈱report􀈱parameters􀈱
􀈱 􀈱
􀈱 Strategy􀈱and􀈱analysis􀈱of􀈱corporate􀈱social􀈱responsibility􀈱
􀈱 􀈱
􀈱 􀈱 Organizational􀈱profile􀈱
􀈱 􀈱 􀈱
INTEGRATION􀈱
􀈱 Supervision,􀈱commitment􀈱and􀈱involvement􀈱
􀈱 􀈱
􀈱 Management􀈱approach􀈱
􀈱 􀈱
􀈱 GRI􀈱performance􀈱indicators􀈱
􀈱 􀈱
􀈱 Information􀈱required􀈱in􀈱the􀈱activity􀈱report􀈱and􀈱excluded􀈱from􀈱additional􀈱notes􀈱to􀈱the􀈱
financial􀈱statements—previously􀈱omitted􀈱according􀈱to􀈱GRI􀈱guidelines􀈱
􀈱 􀈱
􀈱 􀈱 Information􀈱on􀈱business􀈱risk􀈱and􀈱its􀈱management􀈱
􀈱 􀈱 􀈱
􀈱 􀈱 Financial􀈱statements􀈱
􀈱 􀈱
􀈱 Information􀈱on􀈱intangible􀈱assets􀈱of􀈱the􀈱organization,􀈱previously􀈱omitted􀈱from􀈱both􀈱
the􀈱financial􀈱statements􀈱and􀈱GRI􀈱guidelines􀈱
Figure 2. Concept of integrated report parts.
6. Methodology and Data
6.1. Content Analysis
This paper presents a case study of CSR reporting of selected Polish companies using a content
analysis method. Content analysis is the most common research method in the field of CSR reporting.
It may be performed on the basis of words, sentences or other parts of text as units of analysis
that are subsequently assigned to codes. Words do not require a subjective judgment from the
coder. Furthermore, searching for specific terms in the text is regarded as the most reliable form of
content analysis: it always yields the same results in repeated trials, as it can be easily replicated [22].
However, an analysis of reports containing both narrative and quantitative information should be
performed with caution, since content analysis is designed for narratives. Volume of information
(measured by means of the chosen unit of analysis: words, sentences, paragraphs, pages or codes) is
usually a proxy for the quality of information. Although such an approach may obviously lead to
mistakes, it is subsequently refined by means of information structure analysis. Moreover, the extent of
disclosure may be interpreted as a proxy of the relative importance of disclosed information. We used
a mixed approach in the analysis: word counts were used, although the assessment was mostly based
on the topic structure analysis.
In the first stage of research, CSR reports were gathered. We chose energy and mining industry
companies. In the next stage, reports were coded according to the GRI indicators (version 4), but
only the general standard disclosure part, in order to measure the quantity and variety of certain
information. Moreover, the simple existence of certain disclosures was also checked.
296
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
6.2. Data Description
For the purposes of the research, CSR and similar reports were gathered (Table 3). We used
reports submitted for the best CSR report competition, available on the organizer’s website [37].
For the purpose of assessing best practices in CSR reporting, reports submitted for the competition
seemed to be the best choice. In the 2015 competition, 37 reports were submitted, including nine from
companies in the energy industry. The energy industry is often analysed in CSR research because of
its significant sustainability problems and the usually high level of interest from its stakeholders [14].
However, out of the nine energy sector companies, two did not use any CSR reporting standards
(EDF Polska and RWE Polska), and another one used GRI Guidelines version 3.1. Since most reports
were prepared in accordance with GRI version 4, the other reports were excluded from the analysis.
However, to ensure a better comparison and understanding of CSR reporting practices, two companies
were added, both representing the mining industry. Some of the analysed energy companies own
mining facilities, so comparability of the analysis was maintained. The inclusion of KGHM was
additionally justified due to this company’s strong reporting history: it has been repeatedly awarded
for the best annual report (for both financial and non-financial parts).
Table 3. Overview of analysed reports of companies operating in the energy and mining sector in 2014.
Company Name Sector
Turn–Over
(PLN
Million)
No of
Employees
Covered
Period
(Years)
Volume
(Pages)
Word
Count
Type of
Report
External
Verification
ENEA S.A. Energy 9855 10,063 1 60 13,736 CSR only No
Energa S.A. Energy 10,590 11,494 1 140 25,868 CSR only Full
PGE Energy 28,137 39,977 2 114 29,586 CSR only Partial
Polskie LNG S.A. Energy 0 118 2 112 25,246 CSR only Full
Tauron S.A. Energy 18,440 26,108 1 169 45,915 CSR only Full
GK PGNiG Mining/Energy 34,304 29,285 1 88 24,014 CSR only Full
KGHM Polska Mied´z S.A. Mining 20,492 34,097 1 158 47,013 Integrated No
LubelskiW˛egiel
“Bogdanka” S.A. (LWB) Mining 2013 5,795 1 144 74,469 Integrated No
All reports were prepared “in accordance” with the core version of GRI 4. Total volume of analysed
reports amounts to almost 1000 pages and almost 300,000 words (though the report of LWB is bilingual,
so the volume presented in the table is approximately doubled).
7. Results and Discussion
7.1. Report Type and Length
Integrated reporting is still a rather new approach. Thus, it not surprising that only two companies
published integrated reports, whereas others published separate CSR reports. As expected, the amount
of information in integrated reports is generally greater than in separate CSR reports, though a CSR
report by Tauron was also long. A report of Enea was the shortest only because of the extensive
use of external references made in the document. It seems a good strategy for reports presented on
the webpages, but for further analysis only PDF files were used. It is noteworthy that none of the
integrated reports were verified by external parties.
7.2. Importance of Disclosures
CSR information is highly entity-specific (Table 4). Companies and their management may
differently assess the importance of separate aspects of business, and devote more or less space of
reports to them, to better convey a significant message about a company, to get stronger involvement
of stakeholders, or for opportunistic reasons. In order to assess the diversity of topics, the percentage
share of volume of disclosure is used.
Firstly, the share of volume of information classified according to sections of GRI’s general
standard disclosures is presented in Table 4. At this very general level of analysis, the structure
297
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
of reports seems quite similar. The majority of information was relevant to the description of
the organization.
Table 4. Share of volume of information classified according to sections of general standard
disclosures (GRI).
Companies Sections ENEA Energa PGE Polskie
LNG Tauron GK
PGNiG
KGHM
Polska Mied´z LWB
Strategy & analysis 8.84% 14.56% 7.5% 5.2% 11.03% 11.16% 16.97% 5.95%
Organisational profile 34.89% 36.82% 38.02% 34.64% 58.86% 29.77% 33.92% 22.38%
Identified material aspects and boundaries 14.66% 10.27% 11.9% 7.24% 11.96% 14.68% 8.16% 7.09%
Stakeholder engagement 14.72% 6.89% 10.97% 7.09% 9.74% 22.34% 2.19% 6.19%
Report profile 17.98% 25.18% 24.81% 33.39% 2.55% 14.69% 24.02% 43%
Governance 3.01% 3.28% 2.95% 8.48% 1.83% 3.84% 12.55% 7.99%
Ethics and integrity 5.91% 2.99% 3.84% 3.96% 4.02% 3.51% 2.19% 7.39%
Differences with regard to the choice and importance of content (measured by the number of
words) were observed even in the section describing such a relatively simple and non-controversial
issue as the organizational profile. In the “Organizational profile” section, in Energa’s report, the
lengthiest disclosures were devoted to markets (G4-08), in PGE and LWB reports—number of
employees and their structure (G4-10), in Polskie LNG and Tauron reports—information on supply
value chain (G4-12), and in KGHM’s report—information on the commitment to external initiatives
(charters, principles, or other initiatives—G4-15, and memberships of associations—G4-16). Details are
presented in Table 5.
Table 5. Percentages of words related to selected disclosures in the organizational profile section.
Company
GRI Disclosure Code ENEA Energa PGE Polskie
LNG Tauron GK
PGNiG
KGHM
Polska Mied´z LWB
G4-04 Primary brands,
products and services 15% 0% 18% 3% 14% 15% 7% 15%
G4-06 Number and names
of countries where the
organisation operates
1% 0% 3% 2% 2% 0% 13% 12%
G4-08 Markets 24% 35% 11% 10% 8% 14% 7% 6%
G4-09 Scale of the
organisation. 6% 0% 1% 11% 0% 23% 4% 5%
G4-10 Number of
employees 7% 13% 27% 8% 20% 8% 3% 27%
G4-11 collective bargaining
agreements 7% 0% 5% 3% 3% 2% 1% 4%
G4-12 supply-value chain 20% 16% 7% 26% 27% 6% 2% 11%
G4-14 precautionary
approach 4% 8% 8% 3% 6% 6% 11% 1%
G4-15 charters, principles,
or initiatives 2% 13% 4% 17% 9% 7% 23% 3%
G4-16 Memberships 2% 11% 11% 9% 8% 7% 23% 5%
The percentage may proxy for the relative importance of a topic in the description of a
company to stakeholders. Although differences in weights are not surprising, their ranges are worth
commenting on. Even quite similar companies seem to place different emphases on fundamental
issues. Energa report contained hardly any narrative about primary brands, products and services
(though this information was conveyed otherwise, in market disclosure), whereas Tauron’s report
devoted a significant part of the company profile to this topic.
298
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
7.3. Disclosures on Precautionary Approach
According to the GRI Guidelines G4 “The Precautionary Principle refers to the approach taken to
address potential environmental impacts” [26]. Although Implementation Guidance allows companies
to report only their approach to risk management, it is rather clearly designed for assessing one
of the three bottom lines. Only two reports contained direct reference to environmental issues in
this disclosure, and the other reports were limited to a general description of risk management
structures, procedures or models. A general risk management description may possibly serve well
the purpose of assessing risks for the environment, but it may also be seen as a tool for achieving
current goals. As such, these disclosures are more closely linked to instrumental theories than to other
ones. Moreover, when environmental issues were mentioned (Polskie LNG and LWB), the disclosures
were very limited (up to 69 words), because they referred readers to some other sources. General risk
management information was much more elaborate (up to 737 words) (Figure 3).
􀈱
Figure 3. Amount of information on precautionary approach in CSR reports.
7.4. Closer Look at Stakeholder Approach
The idea of CSR reporting is closely related to dialogue with stakeholders [6]. Stakeholders’ role
is not limited to that of information recipients. CSR reporting is part of this dialogue. Thus, disclosures
about stakeholders and dialogue with them may be crucial in assessing the quality of CSR reports.
Data about stakeholder approach is presented in Table 6.
Table 6. Volume of disclosures on stakeholder approach.
Company ENEA Energa PGE Polskie
LNG Tauron GK
PGNiG
KGHM
Polska Mied´z LWB
Number of stakeholders 11 11 15 34 21 10 15 7
Volume of information (no of
words) about stakeholder
engagement, including:
528 435 677 413 649 2284 172 869
‚ G4-25 identification and
selection of stakeholders 301 229 575 95 223 240 34 202
‚ G4-26
stakeholder engagement 301 229 286 135 226 533 69 500
‚ G4-27 stakeholders’
topics and
organization’s response
195 206 80 183 378 1510 59 31
299
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
It seems that the number of stakeholders is not correlated with the volume of information about
them. However, some of the companies define their stockholders quite broadly. Polskie LNG specified
34 groups interested and engaged with the business, where the much larger company PGNiG specified
only 10.
The volume of disclosure is significantly varied (when measured with words). Generally, the
volume is not huge, but graphs and schemes were also used, so a general estimate may be appropriate.
The three disclosures presented in the table (i.e., G4-25, G4-26, and G4-27) were made in the same
paragraph in the text of reports. Companies disclosed information about stakeholders’ identification,
selection and engagement in one narrative, though, in fact, distinct GRI indicators suggest the
importance of separating information.
7.5. Quality of Integrated Reports of Analysed Companies
The authors reviewed integrated reports for 2014 prepared by Polish companies from the mining
sector. Table 7 presents the scope of data included in the integrated reports of the analysed companies.
Table 7. Comparison of the scope of integrated reports of Polish companies from the mining sector.
Report Part KGHM Polska Mied´z S.A. LubelskiW˛egiel “Bogdanka” S.A. (LWB)
Integrated report
parameters About the Report About the Report
Strategy and analysis
of corporate social
responsibility
‚ KGHM today and tomorrow
‚ Our Strategy and perspectives
(Strategy for the years 2015–2020 with
an outlook to 2040)
‚ Support Strategies
‚ Our results in the area of
improving productivity
‚ The most crucial modernisation and
new technology projects
‚ Environmental protection
‚ Business Strategy
‚ Priorities and key objectives of the
CSR Strategy for 2014–2017
‚ CSR strategy in the context of the
business strategy
‚ major development investments
Organizational
profile
‚ About us (Company profile)
‚ Description of the Company activities
‚ Structure of the Group
‚ The model of value creation at
the Company
‚ The context of the
Company operations
‚ KGHM in 2014
‚ Extraction and production
‚ Sales
‚ Key financial data
‚ We are proud of our employees
‚ About the company
‚ Suppliers and supply chain
‚ The situation in the coal market
Supervision,
commitment and
involvement
‚ Letter from the President of the
Management Board
‚ Letter from the Chairman of the
Supervisory Board
‚ Internal control, corporate risk
‚ management and internal audit
‚ Supervision over the
‚ process of financial reporting and
external audit
‚ Letter from the President
‚ The Management Board and the
Supervisory Board
‚ Corporate governance and
shareholding structure
300
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
Table 7. Cont.
Report Part KGHM Polska Mied´z S.A. LubelskiW˛egiel “Bogdanka” S.A. (LWB)
Management
approach
‚ Integrated management system
‚ Research and development
and innovations
‚ Purposes, direction, and Visio
‚ Initiatives supporting knowledge and
innovation development
‚ Financing research by external funds
and international cooperation
‚ Integrated Management System
‚ Innovation aspects in the
management culture
‚ Ethics as component of the
organisational culture
‚ Management approach in the context
of sustainable development
‚ Management and corporate
social responsibility
‚ Social dialogue as component of the
management culture
GRI performance
indicators
‚ Our results in the area of
improving productivity
‚ Our results in the area of development
of the resource base
‚ Our results in the area of income
diversification and gaining
independence from energy prices
‚ Our results in the area of
regional support
‚ Our results in the area of development
of organizational abilities and skills
‚ GRI Index
‚ Effectiveness of safety management at
the workplace
‚ Effectiveness in
environmental protection
‚ Effectiveness in building relations
with the local community
‚ GRI Indicators in table’s
Information required
in the activity report
and excluded from
additional notes to
the financial
statements—previously
omitted according to
GRI guidelines
‚ The currency market in 2014
‚ Investment outlays
‚ Our results in the area of income
diversification and gaining
independence from energy prices
No
Information on
business risk and its
management
‚ Financial risk
‚ Risk Management System
‚ Reporting methodology
‚ Responsible management vs.
integrated system of enterprise
risk management
Financial statements
‚ Selected items from the standalone
and consolidated financial statements
‚ Full
Management
Commentary
‚ The management board’s report on the
activities of the company
‚ Only other financial and nonfinancial
data tables
Auditor’s opinion
and report on its
audit of the financial
statement
Yes Yes
Financial indicators
‚ Revenues from sales
‚ Review of financial performance
‚ Basic ratios describing financial
liquidity, the profitability of assets and
equity and financing:
‚ Liquidity ratios,
‚ Profitability ratios,
‚ Financing ratios,
‚ Capital market ratios
‚ Basic financial result
‚ Business scale, production and sale
‚ Selected financial results
‚ Group’s revenue, costs, profit and loss
301
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
Table 7. Cont.
Report Part KGHM Polska Mied´z S.A. LubelskiW˛egiel “Bogdanka” S.A. (LWB)
Information on
intangible assets of
the organization,
previously omitted
from both the
financial statements
and GRI guidelines
‚ Medical Care Package
‚ Employees insurance
‚ Social Fund assets and liabilities
‚ Pillars of Corporate Governance
‚ Shareholder Structure and Role of
Shareholders (Dialogue with
stakeholders in capital markets
(investors, analysts, regulators)
‚ Ethics in the Company
‚ RESPECT Index
‚ KGHM Organisational Membership
‚ Dividend Policy
No
Integrated reports should address information needs of various groups of stakeholders. To that
end, an adequate amount and the usefulness of disclosed information must be ensured, and the form
and scope of integrated reports should be unified in order to promote comparability. Integrated reports
should present factors used by the organization to ensure long-term success in pursuing its sustainable
development strategy and CSR activities. To be useful, integrated reports need to be transparent,
uncomplicated and understandable to stakeholders. They should be logical, cohesive, complete and
compliant with a generally accepted standard.
Undoubtedly, the amount of content in integrated reports should be reasonably moderate, so
as to ensure transparent, logical and cohesive presentation of information directed to stakeholders.
However, too succinct and superfluous annual reports aimed at providing a positive representation of
economic and social value will not always be useful to stakeholders. Management boards of companies
consider using models proposed by researchers. However, Polish entities that have reported on CSR
activities and sustainable development for several years have faced a number of practical problems
before researchers proposed theoretical models and practical solutions for their accounting systems.
The content of the analysed integrated reports implies that stakeholders will find it difficult to
benchmark the companies on that basis. Differences in the scope and form of presenting financial and
non-financial information make it difficult for stakeholders to compare situations, management quality
or to assess prospective results of the analysed entities. It is difficult to note any links between financial
and non-financial information in the reports. Financial and non-financial information continues to be
presented in two separate parts. One of the underlying reasons may be the lack of a uniform standard
and detailed guidelines prescribing how to achieve such data integration in the report.
The provisions of the Directive 2014/95/EU [31] will take effect in 2017, which will also result in a
number of practical problems [38]. Reporting on environmental information according to the Directive
is a complex issue and gives rise to multiple dilemmas and questions:
(1) Will information presented in compliance with the Directive satisfy the needs of all report users?
(2) Will the cost associated with preparing environmental reports be proportionate to benefits enjoyed
by the entity?
(3) Who will prepare this kind of report in entities that do not have a CSR department?
(4) Who will be the right person to verify environmental information?
(5) Will traditional auditing of the activity report be sufficient for confirming the authenticity of
presented information?
302
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
8. Conclusions
The conclusions of the research are still preliminary but, placed within the context of other
analyses of CSR reporting of Polish companies [7,18,20–22], they provide some insight into its patterns
and structures. CSR reports of Polish companies have similar structures at a very high level of
analysis, but a more detailed study reveals much diversity in the approaches to the report’s content.
Even fairly similar companies may devote significantly different amounts of space to the same issue.
The number of similar stakeholders varies, irrespectively of the company’s size. Considerable diversity
of reporting patterns results from the nature of CSR reporting, because it concerns highly entity-specific
issues. Moreover, the publication of information related to CSR is completely voluntary. Thus, such
considerable diversity is not surprising. However, the guidelines and standards described in the
first part of the paper are aimed at promoting inter alia harmonized and comparable information.
The reports analysed in the research were prepared in accordance with GRI Gudelines version 4, so a
greater degree of uniformity could be expected. However, research on this matter should be continued
in order to explain the limitations to achieving standardization of CSR reporting.
General conclusions regarding the analysis of Polish companies in the energy and mining sectors
can be formulated as follows:
(1) companies internally analyse their environmental impacts
(2) companies use environmental-economic accounting
(3) companies have implemented and operate quality management systems
(4) companies have developed and implemented sustainable development concepts in management
(5) companies have developed and implemented comprehensive environmental management concepts
(6) companies have implemented and operate environmental management systems compliant with
GRI 3.1, GRI 4
(7) companies have implemented and operate risk management systems as well as systems for
managing the impact of risk on sustainable company management
In Poland, the discussion of how to ensure adequate quality and comparability of CSR reports
and the integration of reports should be continued. It is also necessary to consider the problem of
third-party attestation of such reports. In Poland, the financial part is reviewed by auditors, and only a
few auditing companies attest non-financial matters in reports.
Acknowledgments: Acknowledgments: This paper has been written as part of the project No. 51109-XX2
entitled “Business Concept of Annual Statements as a Tool for Communication with Stakeholders and for Building
Economic and Social Value of the Company in its Environment”. The project is carried out by the University of
Economics in Pozna´ n.
Author Contributions: Author Contributions: E.I. Szczepankiewicz was responsible and wrote Sections 2, 5 and
7.5. P. Mu´cko wrote Section 3, performed literature review in Section 4, and did content analysis described in
Sections 6 and 7.1–7.4, (and wrote them). The rest of the paper is a result of joint cooperation.
Conflicts of Interest: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Garriga, E.; Melé, D. Corporate Social Responsibility Theories: Mapping the Territory. J. Bus. Ethics 2004, 53,
51–71. [CrossRef]
2. Carroll, A.B. The pyramid of corporate social responsibility: Toward the moral management of organizational
stakeholders. Bus. Horiz. 1991, 34, 39–48. [CrossRef]
3. European Commission. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. A Renewed EU Strategy 2011–2014 for
Corporate Social Responsibility; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2011.
4. Bilan, Y. Sustainable Development of a Company: Building of New Level Relationship with the Consumers
of XXI Century. Amfiteatru Econ. 2013, 15, 687–701.
303
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
5. Vázquez, J.L.; Lanero, A.; García, M.P.; García, J. Altruism or strategy? A study of attributions of responsibility
in business and its impact on the consumer decision making process. Econ. Sociol. 2013, 6, 108–122. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
6. Baviera-Puig, A.; Gómez-Navarro, T.; García-Melón, M.; García-Martínez, G. Assessing the communication
quality of CSR reports. A case study on four spanish food companies. Sustain. Switz. 2015, 7, 11010–11031.
[CrossRef]
7. Shnayder, L.; Van, R.; Hekkert, M.P. Putting your money where your mouth is: Why sustainability reporting
based on the triple bottom line can be misleading. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0119036.
8. Norman, W.; MacDonald, C. Getting to the Bottom of “Triple Bottom Line”. Bus. Ethics Q. 2004, 14, 243–262.
[CrossRef]
9. Kim, H.; Hur,W.-M.; Yeo, J. Corporate Brand Trust as a Mediator in the Relationship between Consumer
Perception of CSR, Corporate Hypocrisy, and Corporate Reputation. Sustainability 2015, 7, 3683–3694.
[CrossRef]
10. Szczepankiewicz, E.-I. Definiowanie zakresu, zasi˛egu i jako´sci zintegrowanego sprawozdania. Pr. Nauk.
Uniw. Ekon. We Wrocławiu 2013, 174–186. (In Polish)
11. Brown, H.S.; de Jong, M.; Levy, D.L. Building institutions based on information disclosure: Lessons from
GRI’s sustainability reporting. J. Clean. Prod. 2009, 17, 571–580. [CrossRef]
12. Roca, L.C.; Searcy, C. An analysis of indicators disclosed in corporate sustainability reports. J. Clean. Prod.
2012, 20, 103–118. [CrossRef]
13. Moneva, J.M.; Archel, P.; Correa, C. GRI and the camouflaging of corporate unsustainability. Account. Forum
2006, 30, 121–137. [CrossRef]
14. Boiral, O. Sustainability reports as simulacra? A counter-account of A and A+ GRI reports. Account. Audit.
Account. J. 2013, 26, 1036–1071. [CrossRef]
15. Gray, R. Is accounting for sustainability actually accounting for sustainability . . . and how would we know?
An exploration of narratives of organisations and the planet. Account. Organ. Soc. 2010, 35, 47–62. [CrossRef]
16. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion
2015; IAE Statistics; OECD Publishing: Paris, France, 2015.
17. Pietrzyk-Sokulska, E.; Uberman, R.; Kulczycka, J. The impact of mining on the environment in
Poland—myths and reality. Gospod. Surowcami Miner. 2015, 31, 45–64. [CrossRef]
18. European Association for Coal and Lignite (EURACOAL). Coal Industry Aross Europe; European Association
for Coal and Lignite (EURACOAL) AISBL: Bruxelles, Belgium, 2013.
19. Bogdan,W.; Boniecki, D.; Labaye, E.; Marciniak, T.; Nowacki, M. Poland 2025: Europe’s New Growth Engine;
McKinsey & Company: Boston, MA, USA, 2015.
20. Badera, J. Problems of the social non-acceptance of mining projects with particular emphasis on the European
Union—A literature review. Environ. Socio-Econ. Stud. 2014, 2, 27–34. [CrossRef]
21. Badera, J.; Koco´ n, P. Local community opinions regarding the socio-environmental aspects of lignite surface
mining: Experiences from central Poland. Energy Policy 2014, 66, 507–516. [CrossRef]
22. Gamerschlag, R.; Möller, K.; Verbeeten, F. Determinants of voluntary CSR disclosure: Empirical evidence
from Germany. Rev. Manag. Sci. 2010, 5, 233–262. [CrossRef]
23. Mu´cko, P. Koncepcja zmian w Sprawozdawczo´sci Finansowej Spółek Publicznych; Wydawnictwo Naukowe
Uniwersytetu Szczeci ´ nskiego: Szczecin, Poland, 2008. (In Polish)
24. Szadziewska, A. Environmental reporting by large companies in Poland. Zesz. Teoretyczne Rachun. 2012, 68,
97–119.
25. Szadziewska, A. Rachunkowo´s´c jako ´zródło informacji na temat realizacji strategii społecznej
odpowiedzialno´sci biznesu. Zesz. Teoretyczne Rachun. 2014, 75, 95–123. (In Polish) [CrossRef]
26. Szczepankiewicz, E.I. Ewolucja sprawozdawczo´sci przedsi˛ebiorstw—Problemy zapewnienia porównywalno´sci
zintegrowanych raportów z zakresu zrównowa˙zonego rozwoju i CSR. Finanse Rynki Finans. Ubezpieczenia
2014, 71, 135–148. (In Polish)
27. Krasodomska, J. Informacje niefinansowe jako element rocznego raportu spółki. Zesz. Nauk. Uniw. Ekon.
W Krakowie 2010, 816, 45–57. (In Polish)
28. Szczepankiewicz, E.I. Informacje tworza˛ce wartos´c´ rynkowa˛w raportowaniu biznesowym. Kwart. Nauk O
Przedsi˛ebiorstwie 2013, 3, 33–42. (In Polish)
304
Sustainability 2016, 8, 126
29. Ferens, A. Społeczna odpowiedzialnos´c´ przedsie˛biorstwa w zarza˛dczych raportach biznesowych.
Finanse Rynki Finans. Ubezpieczenia 2014, 71, 31–41. (In Polish)
30. Samelak, J. Zintegrowane Sprawozdanie Przedsi˛ebiorstwa Społecznie Odpowiedzialnego; Wydawnictwo
Uniwersytetu Ekonomicznego: Pozna´ n, Poland, 2013. (In Polish)
31. Szczepankiewicz, E. Ryzyka ujawniane w zintegrowanym sprawozdaniu przedsi˛ebiorstwa społecznie
odpowiedzialnego. Ekon. Organ. Przedsi˛ebiorstwa 2013, 5, 71–82.
32. Accounting Standards Committee. National Accounting Standard (NAS) No. 9. Management Commentary;
Accounting Standards Committee: Warsaw, Poland, 2014.
33. Republic of Polish. The Accounting Act. Available online: http://dokumenty.rcl.gov.pl/D2013000033001.pdf
(accessed on 27 January 2016). (In Polish)
34. International Accounting Standards Board (IASB). IFRS Practice Statement: Management Commentary;
International Accounting Standards Board: London, UK, 2010.
35. Szczepankiewicz, E.-I. Management Commentary jako nowe ´zródło informacji o działalno´sci jednostki
gospodarczej. Zesz. Teoretyczne Rachun. 2012, 66, 191–203. (In Polish)
36. Mu´cko, P. Atrybuty sprawozdania z działalno´sci na tle sprawozdania finansowego. Zesz. Teoretyczne Rachun.
2012, 66, 143–152. (In Polish)
37. Biblioteka Raportów. Konkurs Raporty Społeczne. Available online: http://raportyspoleczne.pl/bibliotekaraportow
(accessed on 26 January 2016). (In Polish)
38. The European Parliament; The Council of the European Union. Directive 2014/95/EU of the European
Parlament and of the Council of 22 October 2014 amending Directive 2013/34/EU as Regards Disclosure
of Non-financial and Diversity Information by Certain Large Undertakings and Groups. Available
online: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=OJ:JOL_2014_330_R_0001&from=EN
(accessed on 25 January 2016).
© 2016 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
305
sustainability
Article
Inter-Organisational Coordination for Sustainable
Local Governance: Public Safety Management
in Poland
Barbara Ko˙zuch 1,† and Katarzyna Sienkiewicz-Małyjurek 2,*,†
1 Institute of Public Affairs, Jagiellonian University, Łojasiewicza 4 Str., Kraków 30-348, Poland;
barbara.kozuch@uj.edu.pl
2 Faculty of Organisation and Management, Silesian University of Technology, Roosevelta 26 Str.,
Zabrze 41-800, Poland
* Correspondence: katarzyna.sienkiewicz-malyjurek@polsl.pl; Tel.: +48-32-277-7314
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 23 November 2015; Accepted: 25 January 2016; Published: 28 January 2016
Abstract: The goal of this article is to examine the basic characteristics and factors that impact
inter-organisational coordination in sustainable local governance to address: 1. What are the
factors that effective inter-organisational coordination between independent units creating public
safety system on local level in sustainable local governance depends on? 2. What are the principal
features of inter-organisational coordination in the public safety management system studied in
the context of sustainable local governance? The article’s goal was reached using desk research
analysis and empirical research. The desk research covers an analysis of international scientific
publications. In turn, the empirical research was based on the example of public safety management.
It covered interviews with practitioners dealing with public safety and a hermeneutic process
within a focus group of scholars. As a result of the conducted research, interdependencies between
coordination and other factors of inter-organisational collaboration were identified and the process of
inter-organisational coordination during the emergency situations was characterised.
Keywords: inter-organisational coordination; sustainable local governance; sustainability;
inter-organisational collaboration; public safety management; emergency; business model
1. Introduction
Civilisational development created goods that facilitate life and raise its standards. At the same
time, an increase of hazards has taken place and side effects of technical advancement and space
development have come into being [1,2]. Simultaneously the hazard of industrial calamities is growing,
degradation of resources and natural resources is occurring, while biological and chemical pollution
impacts public life. Moreover, polarisation of society, poverty and privation, terrorism, crime, and
violence are expanding [3,4]. Spatial development is gaining significance in the perspective of social
development, which to a large extent is characterised by lack of organisation and harmony [5].
The consequences of unlimited civilisational growth, globalisation, urbanisation, and an economic
crisis have resulted in paying attention to durability and sustainable use of the possessed potential.
Consequently, in the contemporary functioning of an organisation what gains more and more
significance is the concept of sustainability, which consists in the realisation of rules of sustainable
development and constructive confrontation of resources, goals, and strategic factors in order for the
organisation to exist and develop [6].
In our times, the basic significance in assuring safety and sustainability in the public sector
is attributed to regional and local development factors [7]. This is due to the fact that in the valid
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123; doi:10.3390/su8020123 306 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
legislative solutions self-governments were given independence and freedom of decision making in the
scope of realised tasks. Thanks to that, they have direct possibilities of creating safety and sustainability
in the managed area. However, self-governments are able to realise the rules of safety and sustainability
only by collaborating with other public and private entities and with the society [8]. This interaction
is characterized by inter-organisational collaboration defined as “any joint activity by two or more
agencies working together that is intended to increase public value by their working together rather
than separately” [9] (p. 508). According to Arthur T. Himmelman, this collaboration includes exchange
of information that is favourable to all parties (networking), with altering of activities (coordinating)
and sharing of resources (cooperating) [10]. A similar perspective is presented by Richard C. Feiock,
In Won Lee, and Hyung Jun Park who claim that coordination is a vital instrument of managing
networks [11]. On the other hand Ranjay Gulati, Franz Wohlgezogen, and Pavel Zhelyazkov treat
coordination as one of two indispensable facets of inter-organisational collaboration [12]. In our article
we both agree with the allegation of the above-mentioned authors and in our analyses we assume a
perspective that coordination is one of the principal elements of inter-organisational collaboration.
This approach is based on the broadly known five Fayol’s functions: planning, organising, command,
coordination, and control. By treating coordination as one of the functions of management we present
it in a broad scope, considering that it includes “the activities responsible to ensure the effectiveness
of the collaborative work” [13] (p. 88). Consequently, in our approach coordination is a factor of
collaboration, which refers to a decentralised approach to problem solving [14].
Despite a great deal of research in the public sector, inter-organisational collaboration is still a
challenge. This results above all from decentralisation and narrowing of specialisation of each public
organisation [15]. In public safety management problems without inter-organisational coordination
may cause serious consequences and generate additional hazards, which was observed for example
during Hurricane Katrina and the World Trade Center attacks [16–19]. Moreover, contemporary
development trends focused on internationalisation and at the same time regionalisation combined
with a strong and stable local governance are also a challenge for coordination. Problems in this scope
may result from the overlapping nature of department jurisdictions [20]. There is also a research gap
in the scope of the contextual variables in shaping collaborative efforts [21]. Moreover, despite the
evident importance of coordinating actions during the time of threat, relatively little attention has been
paid to it [22,23]. This means that there are theoretical and empirical gaps in the literature of the field.
The necessity of theoretical justification of the sustainable approach to local governance and the lack
of exhaustive analyses related to coordination generate the need to conduct research studies in this
scope. Thus the goal of this publication is to examine the basic characteristics and factors that impact
inter-organisational coordination in the public safety management system as a part of a sustainable
local governance to address: 1. What are the factors that effective inter-organisational coordination
between independent units creating public safety system on local level in sustainable local governance
depends on? 2. What are the principal features of inter-organisational coordination in the public safety
management system studied in the context of sustainable local governance?
The article’s goal was reached using desk research analysis and empirical research. The desk
research covers an analysis of international scientific publications. In turn, the empirical research was
based on the example of public safety management in Poland.
In our article we refer our research to organisational coordination, since we have been studying
the actions taken in order to harmonise and synchronise the enterprises of various organisations, which
assumption is achieving of common goals and appropriate results [24]. Although we carry out our
analyses in the public sector, we do not make any reference to the model of coordinating public policies.
Our approach is close to the model of relational coordination [25,26] and decentralized intelligent
adaptation [14].
The paper is organised as follows: First, we review sustainability in public safety management.
Then, we discuss the general theory of coordination and explain the role of inter-organisational
coordination in public safety management. In the part containing the research results we identified
307
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
factors influencing and influenced by inter-organisational coordination. Next, we analyse the process
and the features of inter-organisational coordination during emergency situations using the example
of Polish circumstances. We emphasise that inter-organisational coordination is a central attribute of
sustainable public safety management. Our results contribute to better understanding of coordination
complexity in dynamic circumstances.
2. Methodology Research Method and Context
To achieve the purpose of the article, the desk research method and empirical investigations were
carried out.
The desk research was based on the analysis of international scientific literature and it covered
issues related to inter-organisational coordination and public safety management. Publications
connected with the general coordination theory, inter-organisational coordination in the public sector
and in dynamic context played a key role in this scope. We focused on foreign literature, indexed
in generally acclaimed databases (Web of Science, Scopus) and works in English, in order to obtain
a picture of inter-organisational coordination that would be as objective as possible. We have not
covered academic achievements in the scope of coordinating in specific conditions of the private sector
and within one organisation. We have focused on those publications dealing with inter-organisational
coordination, which concern the problems of collaboration.
Moreover, based upon the research conducted so far [27], the relations occurring between
coordination and other factors of effective inter-organisational collaboration were examined. These
analyses were carried out within a hermeneutic process within a focus group of scholarsconducted
in December 2014 within a four-person group of researchers actively involved into investigating
inter-organisational collaboration. Two of them have been involved in research in this domain for over
10 years, and the remaining two—for over 5 years. Discussions within two sessions were held in 2014
on the grounds of practical instances and analyses of typical collaborative situations.
Empirical investigation was based on free-form interviews, which were conducted with 15 medium
and lower level employees employed at police and fire brigade units and medical emergency stations
in the area of the Silesian Province. They concerned the course of collaborative processes in public
safety management. These interviews were conducted in September and October 2013. In the scope of
coordination, this research covered the following issues:
(1) coordinating actions taken within collaboration with other units prior to, during, and after
the threat
(2) enterprises in each unit within common action coordination
(3) the course of the common action coordination process using a random example
In this article we presented the results and interpretation of the conducted analyses.
The research was conducted in Poland, where—in an organisational aspect—the authorities
operate on two levels: government (central) and local government. The central level is responsible
for the continuity of actions aiming at ensuring safety, it monitors and prevents hazards and their
consequences. In turn the task of local governments is to identify hazards at the source, preventing
them and eliminating their consequences. However, the decentralization of public authority ceded
responsibility in the field of public safety onto each local government level i.e., commune (Polish:
gmina), district and also province. Local governments fulfil their tasks independently, while the
government administration has only a possibility to supervise their actions, which however, is limited
and briefly specified by regulations.
308
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
The obligation to take action in case of the occurrence of a hazard is borne by the authority,
which was first to receive information about it. This authority promptly informs about the event that
has occurred the authorities of a higher and lower level respectively, presenting at the same time
their assessment of the situation and information on the intended actions [28]. If the event’s nature
is supralocal, management of the action is taken over by the regional level. Similarly, in case of a
supraregional hazard—management is taken over by the central authorities of state power.
Information on the necessity of taking action may be transferred directly from the hazard’s
location or by the 112 system, which operates in Poland on the local and provincial level. On the local
level it is responsible for operating emergency numbers and organisation of emergency endeavours
in a given action area by means of emergency call centres. In turn, the provincial level facilitates
coordination of actions of a supralocal nature. All reports are registered in an ICT (Information and
Communication Technologies) system and their transfer to an appropriate intervention and rescue unit
depends on verification and justification of the report and disposing of the means of rescue entities [29].
An important issue in the operations of the public safety management system in Poland is the
autonomy of the units participating in the actions. In a situation of hazard, these units operate
autonomously, focusing on realising their statutory tasks and the scope of their cooperation results
from the valid regulations. It is worth mentioning that a similar situation occurs in many places around
the world, including in the scope of coordinating foreign aid during calamities. In other countries there
are solutions that enable creation of inter-organisational teams [30–32]. That is why actions realised in
the examined area in Poland are mainly based on the complementary roles and competences of many
units, properly coordinated work, and effective communication. Taking the above into account, the
basis of managing public safety is inter-organisational collaboration and the units taking part in it
realise their tasks simultaneously, complementing each other.
Our research covers the context of conducting actions in public safety management, which is
dependent on the type, nature, place, and range of the hazard’s occurrence and course. During
stabilisation, when routine action are carried out, the realisation of actions in the examined scope,
including coordinating, is similar to other areas of local governance. General methods of coordination
apply here. Situation changes during extreme events. Each hazard is an individual event, which is
characterised by peculiar specifics of development and duration. The principal challenges are the
following: high uncertainty, sudden and unexpected events; risk and possible mass casualty; increased
time pressure and urgency, severe resource shortage, large-scale impact and damage, disruption of
infrastructure support, multi-authority and massive people involvement, conflict of interest, and
high demand for timely information [23]. Even the same type of hazard concerns a different location,
which generates the need to take different actions. The differences in the duration of the hazard’s
occurrence are also significant. For example, a fire in the summer time, during the occurrence of
drought, will carry a greater risk of occurrence of additional hazards compared with the winter time.
Moreover, the victims of each hazard are different, which also generates the need to adapt actions to
the needs. During extreme events the enterprises conducted in public safety management require
proper preparation, and above all coordination of actions. Moreover, the operation of rescue units
may seem similar, but in practice they differ by the level of organisation, they operate based on other
standards and they are also characterised by a different organisational culture [19]. It is in line with the
assumption of Arjen Boin and Paul ’t Hart [33], according to which there is no unique and best form of
organisation and in addition each emergency situation requires an individual approach that consists of
(1) applying the general principles of organisational coordination; (2) lessons learned from experience
coming from collaboration in similar situations; and (3) the specifics of a given event.
309
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
3. Theoretical Background
3.1. Sustainable Public Safety Management
Public safety is one of the principal foundations of a rich and well functioning society [34].
It constitutes an organised activity realised using personnel, financial, technical, information resources
of many organisations, taken in order to minimise potential hazards, ensuring an undisturbed course
of social life as well as protecting people’s health, life, property, and the environment, which includes
law observation and protection of order with focus on realizing the public interest [35]. Public safety
management covers a large scope of research, which extends from social policy, through local and
criminal policy, up to crisis management [36,37]. Its aim is to ensure the most favourable level of safety
using the existing capabilities and limitations and taking into account the dynamics of the environment.
The principal entities participating in public safety management include the following [38,39]:
‚ Local government
‚ Response and rescue units, including: a core unit where taking actions in response to a specific type
of hazard fall into its competences; basic units which mostly respond collectively and mutually
collaborate in public safety management; ancillary units which supplement actions taken by a
core unit and basic units, and their knowledge and competences are critical in a specific situation
‚ Society: local communities and enterprises operating in a given territory
‚ Media: radio, television, press, Internet
‚ Non-governmental organisations
‚ Research and development units
The listed groups of entities constitute mutually complementary units, which include not only
lawyers and experts on administrative sciences, but also specialists in the scope of management,
sociology, economics, political sciences, technical sciences, environmentalists, etc. They form a public
safety management system that constitutes a dynamic system of units, the aim of which is ensuring
safe and sustainable conditions of operating to all entities in a given administrative area by using the
possessed resources and within the valid formal rules and informal relations, characterised by the
uniqueness and changeability of actions and constant adaptation to current conditions and arising
needs [40].
In the stabilisation phase the local government plays the leading role in the public safety
management system in a given administrative area, ensuring conditions of sustainable local
development. In this scope, preventing hazards achieved by education and building of
resilience is of priority importance. These functions are realised above all by education, media,
non-governmental organisations, and local governments within the formation of culture and
national identity. Also the Police and State Fire Service prepare professional prevention programs
aiming at excluding the occurrence of hazards. Local government fosters growth of the idea of
inter-organisational collaboration.
However, the core of the system covers actions taken by the response and rescue units [41]. These
units are appropriately prepared operation wise, they are trained and have appropriate skills and
knowledge and they have at their disposal means and tools adequate to a given situation. Taking the
above into account, during realisation the leading role is taken over by intervention and rescue units,
while the local governments supervise their actions. Moreover, the principal function in realising
intervention and rescue actions is fulfilled by: the Police, the State Fire Service, and medical rescuers.
Most often these units participate in the actions in the first place. Depending on the type of hazard
and the situation, other entities are engaged as well. The principal actions may be assisted by among
other the Municipal Guard, Boarder Guard, Railway Guards, Road Transport Inspection, the army,
or non-governmental organisations. In turn, the Environmental Protection Inspectorate, Sanitary
Inspection, Construction Supervision Inspectorate, or social assistance workers may act as advisers
310
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
and assist in decision making with their specialist knowledge. The type and degree of engagement of
each unit depends on the level of complexity of a given situation [40].
In that context sustainability is the organisation’s ability to continuously learn, adapt, and develop,
and also revitalize, reconstruct, and reorientate in order to offer high value to recipients in a long
period of time [42]. In the public sector it constitutes a tool which enables partner participation in
making use of public goods taking into account limitations of resources.
From the analysed perspective sustainable local governance is defined as a process run by
local governmental bodies aimed to socially and economically boost a specific region or locality,
while respecting environmental protection and land development, being committed to sustainable
management of the resources pool and tapping into cutting-edge public management tools, i.e.,
coordination of inter-organisational collaboration [8] (p. 325). Its basis is a diagnosis of social
needs, possessed resources, and condition of the environment, in which public services are offered.
Based upon it, local development programs are created that serve sustaining of social life processes.
Improvement of public institution actions, owing to collaboration, increases entrepreneurship and
effectiveness of sustainable activities of local governments. As a result of this, the competitiveness of a
given area grows, while the requiredenvironment quality standards are maintained.
Consequently, sustainability in public safety refers to efficient realisation of enterprises by taking
actions that are appropriate to an existing need, without harm to society, economically justified and
with the highest degree of care for the natural environment. Sustainable public safety management
aims at well-balanced management of resources including local and natural ones as well as those
possessed by each unit of the system being analysed. It constitutes a process realised by local response
and rescue units within inter-organisational collaboration using modern public management tools,
which aims at minimising potential hazards and ensuring most favourable level of public safety
simultaneously respecting and ensuring of principal and integrated order. Taking into account the fact
that it covers all orders of integrated development, it constitutes an interesting research area that is
adequate to the issues being raised.
The characteristic features of public safety management make it an area of public governance,
in which the need for coordination is especially visible. For that matter, it constitutes an interesting
research area that is adequate to the issues being raised.
3.2. Coordination as a Factor of Inter-Organisational Collaboration
In local governance collaboration, which is one of the most important tasks of self-governmental
sub-sector organisation, combining activities in favour of local development, is of key significance
in this scope [43,44]. Local government units constitute collaborating institutions, which require
appropriate coordination within co-governance. Based on the surveys and theoretical considerations,
the literature state that collaboration between public sector organisations is one of several tools of
local development management since it contributes to the growth of public services [45,46]. It is
characterised by interdependence with simultaneous autonomy of functioning as well as settlement
of collaboration rules by means of negotiation and based on organizational and legal factors. As it
is emphasized by R. Lozano, collaboration constitutes a key element in running of the strategy of
sustainability [47].
Inter-organisational collaboration includes sustainable relations, which join each organisation in
realising their common goals. It is defined as a union of two or more organisations that is favourable
to all parties and well-defined, which serves achieving of common goals [48] (p. 4). Among the
causes of establishing inter-organisational collaboration one may distinguish the following: high
levels of interdependence, need for resources and risk sharing, resource scarcity, previous history
of efforts to collaborate, situation in which each partner has resources that other partners need, and
complex issues [49]. Identified on the base of empirical evidence, the principal benefits in the scope
of inter-organisational collaboration include among other [50–53]: consolidation of the resources of
collaborating organisations, knowledge sharing, organisational learning, making use of the experience
311
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
of other organisations, transfer of best practices, and creating innovative solutions. This is not a
new concept, however it has enjoyed great interest only for about two decades [54]. Recently, more
importance is given to the relational aspects.
The growing significance of inter-organisational collaboration in the activity of enterprises
and public institutions results to a large extent from the dynamics of changes in the organisations’
environment, seeking competitive advantage and the fact that at present it is not possible to act alone.
Although the practice of collaboration between organisations is broadly applied, the presumptions
of its implementation are generally known and it does not constitute a new phenomenon, it is a very
difficult process [55]. The results of empirical and theoretical studies, presented in the literature,
indicate that this is mainly due to its complexity, different approaches to realisation of mutual actions,
potential disturbance in the course of collaboration processes, etc. [56,57]. Moreover, legal requirements
or collaboration agreements do not constitute conditions sufficient enough to ensure sustainable
inter-organisational collaboration. This is because its course is impacted by multiple factors with
features that refer to both external and internal conditions, relational factors, and instruments of
inter-organisational collaboration. They have a prerequisite nature. The most important one is
coordination [27].
Coordination is defined as “ . . . the act of managing interdependencies between activities
performed to achieve a goal” [58] (p. 6). It is a relational process based on task interdependencies [59].
It originates from the need for simultaneous execution of activities falling under the powers of various
organisations, and results from the specifics of their operations. From the traditional perspective,
it refers to hierarchical control, whereas the organisational perspective pertains to centralised, dispersed
coordination or a combination of two types at the organisational level [60]. Coordination is a continual
process and a component of the organisation. It depends on the specifics of the entities involved, the
circumstances as well as dynamics of change in the external environment in which the entities operate.
It is assumed that good coordination is nearly invisible, only being noticed most clearly when it is
lacking [61].
In the subject literature there are two levels of coordination: intra- and inter-organisational [62].
The former is related to coordination within an organisation, whereas the latter to coordination
between organisations. In the subject literature one may also find many types of coordination
between collaborating units, for example interim coordination, cross-agency coordination, relational
coordination, network coordination, or network governance [63–66]. In all of the above-mentioned
cases, the aim is to ensure sustainable inter-organisational collaboration by enhancing relations and
task integration. This process is based on shared goals, shared knowledge, and mutual respect [26].
For the needs of this article, the term inter-organisational coordination was assumed.
Inter-organisational coordination is related to harmonising the actions of each unit in order to
common and systematic rendering of specific services [63] (p. 118). It is defined as “the deliberate and
orderly alignment or adjustment of partners’ actions to achieve jointly determined goals” [12] (p. 12).
It is based on such mechanisms as: partner-specific communication, rules and procedures, routines,
liaison, and integration roles, interim authorities, etc. [59] (pp. 909–910). However, in order to realise
common actions, it uses above all informal interactions and pays less attention to the valid procedures
and organisational structures. These mechanisms, in particular, enable sustainable local governance
through building durable relations between collaborating organisations. Key characteristics and
differences of collaboration and coordination were presented in Table 1.
As it results from table 1 collaboration is a broader term than coordination. The subject literature
emphasises that the priority significance of coordination in inter-organisational collaboration results
from its role in the continuous synchronization of tasks and the contribution of collaborating
organisations. It is because it constitutes a relational process, which covers managing correlation
between tasks and between the entities that perform these tasks [63]. It manifests itself through
systematic and reliable communication, which strengthens social relations in order for better integration
of mutual enterprises. It emphasises the significance of the organisational structure, communication,
312
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
and process management [12]. According to such concept, coordination enables going beyond rigid
administrative structures and task centralisation towards greater freedom of action based on goodwill,
trust, and commitment. It enables a more balanced management of resources and actions. Therefore,
inter-organisational coordination indicates specific ways of implementing and conducting joint actions,
owing to which it complements collaboration [12]. The notion of coordination is therefore related to
operational activity, while collaboration concerns strategic decisions to a greater extent.
Table 1. Characteristics of collaboration and coordination.
Characteristics Antecedents Features Modes
Collaboration
Interdependence; need
for resources and risk
sharing; resource
scarcity; previous history
of efforts to collaborate;
situation in which each
partner has resources
that other partners
need [49]; trust,
trustworthiness [11]
Managing resource
dependencies, sharing
risk [12]; Conflict
management [67]
Environment (history of collaboration,
collaborative group seen as a legitimate
leader in the community, favourable
political and social climate);
membership characteristics (mutual
respect, understanding, trust, ability to
compromise); process and structure
(members share a stake in both process
and outcome, multiple layers of
participation, flexibility, development of
clear roles and policy guideness,
adaptability, appropriate pace of
development); communication (open
and frequent, established informal
relationships and communication links);
purpose (concrete , attainable goals and
objectives, shared vision; resources
(sufficient funds, staff, materials, and
time, skilled leadership) [48]
Coordination
Information [11];
perception of
common objects,
communication, group
decision-making [58]
Regulating and
managing
interdependencies [68];
managing
uncertainties [12]; Goal
decomposition [58]
Impersonal (plans, schedules, rules,
procedures); personal (face-to-face
communication); group (meetings) [69];
communication and decision
procedures; mutual monitoring or
supervisory hierarchy; group decision
making; Mutual monitoring or
property-rights sharing; programming;
Hierarchical decision making;
Integration and liaison roles; authority
by expectation and residual arbitration
[68]; formal (departmentalization or
grouping of organizational units;
centralization or decentralization of
decision making; formalization and
standardization; planning; output and
behaviour control) and informal (lateral
relations; informal communication;
socialization) [70]
Source: own elaboration based on quoted literature.
A great number of research studies, information, and models in the scope of coordination causes
that this area has been developing in various directions, depending on the conducted analyses. In some
works its cognitive nature is emphasised, while in other the behavioural one, moreover it may be
understood as a form of organizational control or team-based concertive control [67]. Attempts to
model the interdependencies and level of coordination in specific fields are not consistent in the
scope of coordination characteristics, but they point out which specific challenges are related to
coordination [71]. For example, Henry Mintzberg’s coordination model relates the coordination
mechanisms to the organizational structure [72]. On the other hand, the model of Thomas W. Malone
313
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
and Kevin Crowston is based on a concept of coordination as management of dependency between
actions [61]. Moreover, on the one hand it is assumed that the problems of coordination may be
solved by implementing appropriate mechanisms, of a general nature, which means that they may
be applied in various organisational systems. On the other hand, there are opinions stating that one
should identify in detail the nature of the environment in which an organisation operates in case
of specific events and next develop appropriate procedures in relation to them [14]. We agree with
the second approach and also the assumption that the higher the degrees of interdependency and
the levels of tasks and environment uncertainty are, the more developed forms of coordination are
required [12].These dependencies are especially visible in public safety management.
3.3. Basics of Inter-Organisational Coordination in Public Safety Management
According to Thomas E. Drabek [73], coordination is at the core of the practice of actions for safety.
It is the philosopher’s stone of public administration, and a central factor in poor performance during
an response activities [74,75]. In actions for safety, coordination proceeds at diverse organisational
levels [76]. It occurs in an intra-organisational dimension as coordination within specific organisations
as well as an inter-organisation aspect as a regulator of external relations in an organisation. In this
context, it is possible to talk about capabilities for effective resources administration in the form
of inter-organisational teams, partnerships, alliances, etc. [77]. This capability is determined by
the ability of specific organisations to adapt to dynamic conditions under which they operate, and
to effective communication aimed at hammering out common agreements and a common stance
regarding manners for conducting operations. At the core are both legal regulations as well as formal
and informal relations emerging within collaborated organisations. Vertical coordination puts into
place rigid principles as to the division of responsibility, the execution of activities and the control of
outcomes. However, a new approach incorporating organisational connections gives priority to the
mutual adaptation of entities and the integration of resources, authority and knowledge over formal
mechanisms of authority [75,78].
Effective coordination is a necessary element of conducting action in public safety management.
It is difficult to conduct in this area because it is connected with uncertainty, unexpected events,
risk of hazards’ accumulation, urgency, and infrastructure interdependency [23]. Apart from that,
the situational complexity creates conditions, in which participation of various agencies is required
and collaboration between them is necessary for realisation of actions. What is more, the higher the
number of various organisations trying to achieve a common goal, the less probable that they will
act in a coordinated way in order to achieve this goal [79]. In this connection, inter-organisational
coordination in public safety management is a big challenge. The differences between the general
theory of coordination and coordination between organisations in public safety management were
presented in Table 2.
The principal difference between inter-organisational coordination in general and in public safety
management lies in the nature of joint action. This influences all characteristics of coordination.
It also causes that failures have more serious consequences and the intrinsic and extrinsic motivation,
concerns, and results depend on the creativity and skills in making decisions in changeable and
uncertain conditions, with limited pieces of information.
In the deliberations concerning inter-organisational coordination, we assume that its significance
results from counterbalancing in the scope of actions and the level of participation of many independent
organisations, taking into account social needs, natural environmental and spatial values as well as
economic conditions. It facilitates achieving of the assumed goal avoiding excessive costs and damage.
Consequently, inter-organisational coordination enables realisation of actions in changing, unsure, and
dynamic conditions in accord with the philosophy of sustainability.
314
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
Table 2. General and specific approach to coordination.
Specification General Theory of
Coordination
Coordination in Public
Safety Management
Substance of
inter-organisational
agreement
Ways of shaping interactions Ways of shaping interactions between
autonomous organizations
Motivation
More effectively managing
task interdependencies and
uncertainties
More effectively managing task
interdependencies in order to identify and
remove the sources and consequences of hazards
Concern/risks
Operational risk: inability to
coordinate across
organizational boundaries
Operational and situational risks: inability to
coordinate joint actions of autonomous
organisations in dynamic and
uncertain circumstances
Typical positive results
Efficiency, effectiveness,
flexibility/adaptiveness of
joint action
Effectiveness, flexibility, adaptiveness of joint
action in unique and rapidly changing situations
Typical failures Omission, incompatibilities,
misallocation
Inadvertent omissions leading to chaos,
incompatibilities in rescue procedures,
inadequate response, insufficient prevention of
accumulation of hazards, increasing number of
victims, additional damages
Remedies against failures
Hierarchies, authority, and
formalisation; institutions and
conventions; inter-personal
linkages and liaisons
Changing hierarchical positions, integrated
authority structures, improvement of rescue
procedures, shared organising of training and
simulations of events during the stabilisation
phase, progressive adapting of regulations,
advancing communication systems, creating
good formal and informal relationships based on
trust and organisational concern
Source: own elaboration based on [12] (p. 66).
4. Research Results
4.1. Relations between Coordination and other Instruments of Inter-Organisational Collaboration
Our previous research indicated that coordination is one of the key factors of inter-organisational
collaboration [27]. These factors have a mutual impact on each other, which in effect influences both
their role and the efficiency of collaboration itself. Taking this into consideration, we have decided to
present our own reasoning based on chosen publications, which include the relations that characterise
coordination and other factors of efficient inter-organisational collaboration. In our investigation a
3-level grade scale was applied to evaluate the impact of each factor, i.e.: 1—weak influence, 2—medium
influence, and 3—strong influence. Whereas the relations between the factors were analysed in
reference to the following grade scale: 0—lack of impact or minor impact, 1—significant impact, and
2—key impact.
Inter-organisational coordination was evaluated as a factor which has strong influence on
the course of actions. This mainly results from specific and complementary competences of each
organisation, task distribution, and responsibilities. These factors create the foundations of efficient
realisation of actions. Taking this into account, inter-organisational coordination is of key importance
to the course of collaboration.
Studying the relations occurring between inter-organisational coordination and other factors of
efficient inter-organisational collaboration, our focus was directed to those factors that have a significant
and key impact on the processes of action coordination between organisations. The relations, which
were identified, are illustrated in Figure 1. It depicts those factors, which:
315
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
‚ only impact the course of inter-organizational coordination
‚ both impact and are a result of inter-organizational coordination
‚ are only a result of inter-organizational coordination
In figure 1 factors having a significant impact were indicated by a thinner arrow, while the key
factors were indicated by a thicker one.
As it results from the verified connections, the key factors of inter-organizational collaboration,
which influence inter-organisational coordination processes are:
‚ communication in inter-organisational working teams,
‚ constraints in inter-organisational collaboration,
‚ leadership with organisational and communication skills,
‚ organisation of collaborative work (e.g., time pressured, competitive, rapidly changing, stability),
‚ management of inter-organisational collaboration (e.g., styles, transparency of decisions
and guidance),
‚ inter-organisational trust,
‚ professional communication between personnel from individual organisations.
These factors show that inter-organisational coordination depends mainly on organisational and
relational conditions, which exist between collaborating units. Whereas, the key factors influenced by
inter-organisational coordination include:
‚ organisation of collaborative work,
‚ support within collaborating organisations,
‚ adaptability to changing work requirements,
‚ flexibility and openness to changing circumstances of collaboration,
‚ performance of inter-organisational collaboration,
‚ self interest of individual organisations from collaboration.
These factors impact, above all, situation conditions in sustainable public safety management
and the will to collaborate. The other analysed factors are also of significance, but they are not that
important in inter-organisational coordination. Each of the said factors impacts the level of coordination
sustainability. However, the significance of each one individually depends on the existence of other
factors, which may mutually strengthen or weaken its influence. Moreover, the nature of relations
taking place between inter-organisational coordination and other factors influencing and influenced
by this process, is complex. This mainly results from the existing interdependency between all factors
of effective collaboration and their mutual stimulating.
316
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
Figure 1. Factors influencing and influenced by inter-organizational coordination. Source: own elaboration based on [48,80–91].
317
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
4.2. Inter-Organisational Coordination during Emergency Situations
The process of managing public safety in terms of phases may be presented in the following cycle:
actions taken prior to the hazard occurrence, during the hazard, after the hazard has been obviated [29].
Inter-organisational coordination takes place in all of the said phases, however its significance can be
seen to the biggest degree in the phases in time and once the hazard has been obviated. Prior to the
occurrence of the hazard, coordination is necessary in such action as preparing mutual enterprises,
common training, and team building. However, these actions are conducted in stable conditions, in
which considered modifications and changes are possible. The effect of turbulence and uncertainty
of conditions in emergency situations is that inter-organisational coordination plays a key role in the
phases prior to the occurrence and during the hazard.
The inter-organisational coordination of operations in emergency situations is executed by a
single commander-in-chief. Our own empirical research showed that in Poland, responsibility for that
is devolved on the Rescue Action Supervisor who is, in most cases, a fireman. Only in the event of a
terrorist attack or demonstration command is taken over by a policeman with sufficient powers. Such
inter-organisational coordination involves collecting, analysing, and verifying information, as well as
assigning a sequence of operations performed and entities engaged. A classic example illustrating the
coordination of operations in emergency management, is the flooding that took place in May and June
of 2010 which engulfed the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland, Hungary, Ukraine, Austria, Germany,
and Serbia. It was one of the largest floods in Poland in that during the period from 14 May to 30 June
2010, around 76,800 interventions related to relief and recovery actions were reported [92]. At that
time, there was an increased demand for pumps with higher capacity than those the services already
possessed. Efforts at the national level were launched, and firemen from other EU states took part in
the operations. Persons charged with rescue actions in this event accomplished the following tasks
based on communication processes:
(1) prepare scenarios for potential situations, analyses, weather forecasts, collect information,
anticipate demand;
(2) calculate forces and resources, assess potential, analyse situations, prepare proposals for
disposing forces depending on the demand, examine potential for requesting external forces;
(3) contribute to the formulation of solutions intended to accomplish operations, raise forces,
dislocate forces, put forces into operation, continue monitoring the situation and its reporting;
(4) monitor the efficacy of the formulated solutions, participate in the work of military staff
and teams, monitor the situation’s progress, collaborate with commanders with regard to
specific actions;
(5) control efficacy of operations conducted by operational groups, verify information handed over,
e.g., by phone, with the actual situation.
Another example of operations coordination and emergency management in Poland was the
head-on collision of two high-speed passenger trains on 3 March 2012 near the town of Szczekociny.
As a result, 16 people were killed and 57 passengers were injured. In the first train, an electric
locomotive was destroyed and the first two carriages were derailed, while in the other train the
locomotive and one carriage were derailed. Services from the national emergency management level
and fire brigades from four provinces were used in the rescue action, including 450 rescuers and
400 policemen. The coordination process covered such operations as evacuation of the people affected,
rendering first aid, searching destroyed carriages and the surrounding crash site, enabling access to
trapped passengers, designating a temporary landing strip for helicopters of the Air Rescue Service,
and securing the incident site. Coordination of basic operations did not pose a problem. However,
contentious issues were exposed, and they referred to extra activities and details, e.g., places for tents.
These examples confirm that both formal as well as posteriori relationships provide a basis for the
coordination of operations during emergency situations. Moreover, they allow us to ascertain that
318
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
organisational factors and organisational behaviours constitute the key determinants for improving
communication and coordination in sustainable public safety management.
The quantity of information is essential for coordination and execution of effective operations in
dynamically changing circumstances requires application of cutting-edge organisational and technical
solutions. In addition, ”some of the major challenges (...) include information mismanagement,
resource allocation issues, and ineffective communication” [93] (p. 260). These challenges can
lead to communication and consequently coordination breakdowns. To ensure efficacy of rescue
actions and to streamline communication as well as coordination processes, there are emergency
coordination centres established and they make up complex organisational and technical structures
in line with administrative division at the local, regional, and national levels. Such centres also
operate at the international level, e.g., Emergency Response Coordination Centre functions in the
EU. It is a one-stop-shop providing an overview of the available civil protection assets and acts as a
communication hub between the participating states, the affected country and dispatched field experts.
The main purpose of its existence is to facilitate collaboration in civil protection interventions in the
event of major emergencies, e.g., through pool resources that can be made available to help disaster-hit
countries and share best practices in disaster management [94].
Emergency coordination centres are a support centre for those in charge of rescue actions. They
handle information transfer as well as vertical and horizontal communication outside the incident site.
They also oversee the course of action and if needed they bring and send extra resources to action.
Thus, emergency coordination centres run the so-called “external coordination”. The centres operate
in line with a mutual substitution principle. It means that a report which cannot be received for any
reason in a centre relevant for the caller’s domicile will be automatically redirected to another Centre.
For receiving the reports operators are employed, there may be also officers delegated, assigned from
the police or fire brigade, employees in emergency management departments as well as municipal
policemen. In Poland the tasks conferred on the centres include [95]:
(1) handle alarm reports, excluding fire signalisation systems,
(2) register and store data regarding alarm reports, including phone recordings with the complete
alarm report, personal data of the reporting person and other persons indicated when receiving
the report, information on the incident site and its type and shortened description of the event
for the period of 3 years;
(3) conduct analyses related to functioning of the system in the area handled by the centre and
producing statistics with regard to numbers, types, and response time for alarm reports;
(4) collaborate and exchange information with emergency coordination centres;
(5) exchange information and data, excluding personal data, for the purposes of analyses with the
Police, National Fire Service, administrators of medical rescue teams, and entities which phone
numbers are handled within the system.
In other countries, tasks accomplished by centres are essentially similar. For instance, in Sri Lanka
they are as follows [96]:
(1) Maintaining and operating early warning towers and other early warning dissemination equipments
(2) Dissemination of early warning messages and ensuring reception at remote vulnerable villagers
(3) Coordination of donor assistance to strengthen capacity of technical agencies for early warning
(4) Initiating awareness on activities related to early warning among various agencies and the public
(5) Guiding district disaster management units in coordinating and implementing warning
dissemination-related activities in the province, district, and local authority levels.
Emergency coordination centres collaborate with services statutorily appointed for security
protection as well as social rescue organisations. Their operations enable to reduce the waiting time
for assistance as well as time for rescue actions themselves, properly match forces and resources to
the operations, bolster information transfer as well as create a consistent database for events [97].
319
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
Receipt of alarm reports in the centre by alarm number operators and dispatchers is carried out by
means of information and communication technology systems. These systems ensure automatisation
of receipt and registration of reports. They allow for identification of the phone number, location, and
visualisation of the place from which the emergency call comes. Besides, it also enables overseeing the
actual state of calls handled, elimination of hoax calls, and their selection [98–100].
An interesting example of the emergency coordination centre is the Integrated Security Centre
operating in Ostrava in the Czech Republic since 2011. Its initial concept originated in the 1990s
when the urgency for collaboration among rescue services was identified. It is currently a part of the
Czech Integrated Rescue System which covers a connections system as well as principles guiding
collaboration and emergency coordination of local and central authorities, as well as individuals and
authorised persons when the necessity arises to undertake rescue or humanitarian actions and to
prepare and conduct emergency operations. The Integrated Security Centre houses such units as: fire
brigade, police, medical emergency, and municipal authorities. They form the mainstay of the system.
An auxiliary role is played by: municipal police, military forces, ministry of health, ministry of interior,
remaining rescue units, security companies, and non-governmental organisations. The unit responsible
for response activities is the fire brigade across all levels of the state organisation depending on the
scale of the event. However, the conditions for conducting the operations are determined by the
public administration. The functioning of the Centre has helped to eliminate problems related to
communication and operations coordination and to boost inter-organisational collaboration which
through direct contacts and joint resolution of problems enables to continually improve collaboration
principles within the system.
The analysis of the course of inter-organisational coordination during emergency situations
enables stating that coordination constitutes a liaison which bonds actions taken in the scope of
public safety management. Its significance results from the span of tasks that are realised, in which
performance many entities are engaged, in each case in a different quantity and configuration. The
conducted actions are based on collaboration between each of the partners, which separate and
autonomous units and whose competences complement each other. This leads to a conclusion that
inter-organisational coordination is a key factor of public safety management, which principal features
are as follows:
‚ integrity of actions: the enterprises of each organisation are coherent and mutually complementary,
while efficiency may be achieved only within mutual realisation of tasks;
‚ interdependence: each organisation is mutually dependent both in the scope of conducting actions,
transferring information, as well as managing resources;
‚ mutuality: mutual enterprises are based on relations between each organisation;
‚ multiplicity: there are many possibilities of coordinating actions within one enterprise;
‚ adaptability: methods of coordination are adapted to existing conditions.
Moreover, inter-organisational coordination is a result of legal and organisational, social, and
situational conditions. The first above-mentioned conditions are related to the existing legal regulations,
procedures, and by-laws. They specify the rules of coordinating commonly conducted actions. In turn,
the social conditions cover inter-organisational relations, which through shaping of appropriate
behaviours, influence the enterprises’ efficiency. Whereas, situational conditions specify the current
context of actions’ realisation. They cause that flexibility and agility is required of organisations
participating in the actions. Both the factors and conditions of inter-organisational coordination
impact the level of sustainable local governance. In principle, local governance is characterised by
accountability, transparency, openness, and publicness. These features are favourable to improving
sustainable local governance.
The analyses confirm the complexity of inter-organisational coordination and significance of
relational aspects in the theory and practice of managing public safety.
320
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
5. Discussion and Conclusions
In this article we analyse inter-organisational coordination in the public safety management
system. In our opinion the notion of collaboration is broader than coordination, which is consistent
with the analyses conducted by Arthur T. Himmelman [10]. We also adapted the opinion of Richard
C. Feiock, InWon Lee, and Hyung Jun Park [11] and we believe that coordination and collaboration
are not points on a simple scale of service integration, but differ in their forms and structure.Starting
from Fayol’s understanding of coordination, we reinforce this notion as one of the key factors of
collaboration. In our deliberations we also claim that in our research the context of realisation of
actions is of significant importance, since the mechanism of coordination, which regulate the ways of
effective collaboration, result from it [101]. According to Elodie Gardet and Caroline Mothe groups
of representative mechanisms of coordination include the following [102]: exchange formalisation,
trust, result division, guarantees against opportunistic behaviour, and conflict resolution. In turn,
Jody Hoffer Gittell and Leigh Weiss on the base of a nine-hospital quantitative study of patient
care coordination analysed such coordination mechanisms as [103]: routines, information systems,
meetings, and boundary spanners. In our research we have demonstrated that in the Polish context of
public safety management the formal mechanisms of coordination play the main role, which results
from institutional arrangements. In the conditions of uncertainty and risk the formal decision-making
structures constitute the foundation of conducting actions, although other mechanisms—such as trust,
meetings, and routines—are also significant. To a greater extent these mechanisms are applied in the
period of stabilisation, during action preparation. This proves that the priority significance of each
coordination mechanism results from the situational context.
The analyses presented in this article are not free from limitations. These limitations result above
all from the fact that the research is of a preliminary nature and it concerns a diagnosis of the level
of inter-organisational coordination in public safety management in relation to factors of effective
inter-organisational collaboration. In the future, we plan to expand these research studies in relation
to enhanced inter-organisational coordination endeavours. Moreover, the research is located in the
Polish context. Taking that into account, it is necessary to study the course of inter-organisational
coordination in other social and political conditions. It is also recommended to comprehensively
analyse the internal and external conditions of effective inter-organisational coordination, for which
purpose the research on business models of public safety organisations may prove useful.
Despite these limitations we have been able to achieve the assumed goal of this publication. We
argue that inter-organisational coordination as an instrument of collaboration between autonomous
units is the key factor in sustainable public safety management. It binds the actions taken by each
organisation, enables flexible adaptation of enterprises and possessed resources to the existing
conditions, it configures the networks of public services’ delivery and it maximises the usage of
the possessed abilities. As a result of this, it increases the efficiency of public safety management.
In conclusion we claim that:
(1) Inter-organisational coordination depends to a large extent on organisational and relational
conditions, which occur between collaborating units. They include among other such factors
as: communication in inter-organisational working teams, constraints in inter-organisational
collaboration, leadership with organisational and communication skills, organisation of
collaborative work (e.g., time pressured, competitive, rapidly changing, stability), management
of inter-organisational collaboration (e.g., styles, transparency of decisions, and guidance),
inter-organisational trust, and professional communication between personnel from
individual organisations.
(2) Coordination in public safety management is protean. During stabilization it is carried out
by public administration and it involves determination of preventive operations. Some ways
of that coordination can be applied in other areas of sustainable local government. However
during the realisation phase the person in charge of rescue actions coordinates activities within
321
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
the incident site. Outside the incident site the coordination function is fulfilled by emergency
coordination centres. This solution is the result of complexity embedded in the unique situation
and efforts to be undertaken in face of hazard. Such coordination, particularly creation of formal
and informal relationships based on trust and organisational concern, can be used in sheer
inter-organisational collaboration.
(3) The principal features of inter-organisational coordination considered with regard to collaborated
management are: integrity of actions, interdependence, mutuality, complexity, and adaptiveness
to unique and rapidly changing situations. At the same time, inter-organisational coordination is
a result of legal, organisational, social, and situational conditions. Features of inter-organisational
coordination have a considerable impact on the level of sustainable public safety management.
Acknowledgments: Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank an anonymous reviewers for
constructive comments and suggestions. Empirical data were collected within the authors’ own investigations
carried out in 2013–2015 in the project entitled “Coordination, communication and trust as factors driving effective
inter-organisational collaboration in the system of public safety management”, financed by the Polish funds of
the National Science Centre allocated on the basis of the decision No. DEC-2012/07/D/HS4/00537. Whereas,
preparing of the publication was partly developed within the Statutory Research 2013–2016 of the Institute of
Public Affairs of the Jagiellonian University in Cracow entitled “Managing Public Sector”.
Author Contributions: Author Contributions: Barbara Ko˙zuch and Katarzyna Sienkiewicz-Małyjurek worked
together to conceived, designed and performed the research, analyzed the data and wrote the paper.
Conflicts of Interest: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Van Wassenhove, L.N. Humanitarian aid logistics: Supply chain management in high gear. J. Oper. Res. Soc.
2006, 57, 475–489. [CrossRef]
2. Szymczak, M.; Sienkiewicz-Małyjurek, K. Information in the city traffic management system. The analysis of
the use of information sources and the assessment in terms of their usefulness for city routes users. LogForum
2011, 7, 37–50.
3. Slabbert, A.D.; Ukpere, W.I. Poverty as a transient reality in a globalised world: An economic choice. Int. J.
Soc. Econ. 2011, 38, 858–868. [CrossRef]
4. Smith, N. Economic inequality and poverty: Where do we go from here? Int. J. Sociol. Soc. Policy 2010, 30,
127–139. [CrossRef]
5. Sienkiewicz-Małyjurek, K. Spatial and organisational conditions of public safety in cities. In Current Problems
of Regional Development, Proceedings of the International Scientific Conference on Hradec Economical
Days 2008: A Strategy for Development of the Region and the State Location, University Hradec Kralove,
Czech Republic, 5–6 February 2008; Jedlicka, P., Ed.; pp. 95–99.
6. Jabłon´ ski, A.Wieloparadygmatycznos´c´ w zarza˛dzaniu a trwałos´c´ modelu biznesu przedsie˛biorstwa. Studia i
Prace Kolegium Zarza˛dzania i Finansów Szkoły Głównej Handlowej w Warszawie 2014, 139, 51–72. (In Polish)
7. Kozłowski, S. Polska droga do zrównowa˙zonego rozwoju. In Rozwój zrównowa˙zony na szczeblu krajowym,
regionalnym i lokalnym—do´swiadczenia polskie i mo˙zliwo´sci ich zastosowania na Ukrainie; Kozłowski, S.,
Haładyj, A., Eds.; KUL: Lublin, Poland, 2006; pp. 159–166. (In Polish)
8. Ko˙ zuch, B.; Sienkiewicz-Małyjurek, K. Collaborative networks as a basis for internal economic security
in sustainable local governance. The case of Poland. In The Economic Security of Business Transactions.
Management in Business; Raczkowski, K., Schneider, F., Eds.; Chartridge Books Oxford: Oxford, UK, 2013;
pp. 313–328.
9. O’Leary, R.; Vij, N. Collaborative Public Management: Where Have We Been and Where Are We Going?
Am. Rev. Public Adm. 2012, 42, 507–522. [CrossRef]
10. Himmelman, A.T. On coalitions and the transformation of power relations: Collaborative betterment and
collaborative empowerment. Am. J. Community Psychol. 2001, 29, 277–284. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Feiock, R.C.; Lee, I.W.; Park, H.J. Administrators’ and Elected Officials’ Collaboration Networks: Selecting
Partners to Reduce Risk in Economic Development. Public Adm. Rev. 2012, 72, S58–S68. [CrossRef]
12. Gulati, R.; Wohlgezogen, F.; Zhelyazkov, P. The Two Facets of Collaboration: Cooperation and Coordination
in Strategic Alliances. Acad. Manag. Ann. 2012, 6, 531–583. [CrossRef]
322
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
13. Raposo, A.B.; Fuks, H. Defining Task Interdependencies and Coordination Mechanisms for Collaborative
Systems. In Cooperative Systems Design; Blay-Fornarino, M., Pinna-Dery, A.M., Schmidt, K., Zaraté, P., Eds.;
IOS Press: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2002; pp. 88–103.
14. Leonard, H.B.; Howitt, A.M. Organising Response to Extreme Emergencies: The Victorian Bushfires of 2009.
Aust. J. Public Adm. 2010, 69, 372–386. [CrossRef]
15. Gregory, R. All the King’s horses and all the King’s men: Putting New Zealand’s public sector back together
again. Int. Public Manag. Rev. 2003, 4, 41–58.
16. Comfort, L.K. Crisis Management in Hindsight: Cognition, Communication, Coordination, and Control.
Public Adm. Rev. 2007, 67, 189–197. [CrossRef]
17. Leonard, H.B.; Howitt, A.M. Katrina as prelude: Preparing for and responding to Katrina-Class Disturbances
in the United States—Testimony to U.S. Senate Committee, 8 March 2006. J. Homel. Secur. Emerg. Manag.
2006, 3, 1547–7355. [CrossRef]
18. Comfort, L.K.; Kapucu, N. Inter-organizational coordination in extreme events: The World Trade Center
attacks, 11 September 2001. Nat. Hazards 2006, 39, 309–327. [CrossRef]
19. Bharosa, N.; Lee, J.; Janssen, M. Challenges and obstacles in sharing and coordinating information during
multi-agency disaster response: Propositions from field exercises. Inf. Syst. Front. 2010, 12, 49–65. [CrossRef]
20. Panday, P.K. Policy implementation in urban Bangladesh: Role of intra-organizational coordination.
Public Organ. Rev. 2007, 7, 237–259. [CrossRef]
21. Meek, J.W. Nuances of Metropolitan Cooperative Networks. Public Adm. Rev. 2012, 72, S68–S69. [CrossRef]
22. Chen, R.; Sharman, R.; Chakravarti, N.; Rao, H.R.; Upadhyaya, S.J. Emergency response information system
interoperability: Development of chemical incident response data model. J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 2008, 9, 1–54.
23. Chen, R.; Sharman, R.; Rao, H.R.; Upadhyaya, S.J. Coordination In Emergency Response Management,
Developing a framework to analyze coordination patterns occurring in the emergency response life cycle.
Commun. ACM 2008, 51, 66–73. [CrossRef]
24. Melin, U.; Axelsson, K. Understanding Organizational Coordination and Information Systems—Mintzberg’s
Coordination Mechanisms Revisited and Evaluated. Available online: http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2005/115/
(accessed on 18 December 2015).
25. Gittell, J.H. Relationships between service providers and their impact on customers. J. Sci. Res. 2002, 4,
299–311. [CrossRef]
26. Gittell, J.H. Relational coordination: coordinating work through relationships of shared goals, shared
knowledge and mutual respect. In Relational Perspectives in Organisational Studies: A Research Companion;
Kyriakidou, O., Özbilgin, M.F., Eds.; Edward Elgar Publishers: Cheltenham, UK, 2006; pp. 74–94.
27. Ko˙ zuch, B.; Sienkiewcz-Małyjurek, K. Factors of effective inter-organisational collaboration: A framework
for public management. Transylvanian Review of Administrative Sciences, forthcoming.
28. Government Centre for Security. Act of 26 April 2007 on the Crisis Management. Available online: http://
rcb.gov.pl/eng/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/ACT-on-Crisis-Management-final-version-31-12-2010.pdf
(accessed on 25 January 2016).
29. Ko˙ zuch, B.; Sienkiewicz-Małyjurek, K. Information sharing in complex systems: A case study on public
safety management. Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 2015, 213, 722–727. [CrossRef]
30. Waugh,W.L.; Streib, G. Collaboration and Leadership for Effective Emergency Management. Public Adm. Rev.
2006, 66, 131–140. [CrossRef]
31. Kapucu, N.; Arslan, T.; Demiroz, F. Collaborative emergency management and national emergency
management network. Disaster Prev. Manag. 2010, 19, 452–468. [CrossRef]
32. Kapucu, N. Disaster and emergency management systems in urban areas. Cities 2012, 29, S41–S49. [CrossRef]
33. Boin, A.; Hart, P. Organising for Effective Emergency Management: Lessons from Research. Austr. J.
Public Adm. 2010, 69, 357–371. [CrossRef]
34. Choenni, S.; Leertouwer, E. Public Safety Mashups to Support Policy Makers. In Electronic Government and the
Information Systems Perspective, Proceedings of the First International Conference EGOVIS 2010, Bilbao, Spain,
31 August–2 September 2010; Andersen, K.M., Francesconi, E., van Engers, A.G.T.M., Eds.; Springer-Verlag:
Berlin Heidelberg, Germany, 2010; pp. 234–248.
35. Sienkiewicz-Małyjurek, K. Rola samorza˛dów lokalnych w kształtowaniu bezpieczen´ stwa publicznego.
Samorz. Teryt. 2010, 7–8, 123–139. (In Polish)
323
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
36. Tomasino, A.P. Public Safety Networks as a Type of Complex Adaptive System. In Unifying Themes in
Complex Systems, Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Complex Systems, Volume VIII,
Boston, MA, 26 June–1 July 2011; Sayama, H., Minai, A., Braha, D., Bar-Yam, Y., Eds.; New England Complex
Systems Institute Series on Complexity, NECSI Knowledge Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2011; pp. 1350–1364.
37. Williams, C.B.; Dias, M.; Fedorowicz, J.; Jacobson, D.; Vilvovsky, S.; Sawyer, S.; Tyworth, M. The formation of
inter-organizational information sharing networks in public safety: Cartographic insights on rational choice
and institutional explanations. Inf. Polity 2009, 14, 13–29.
38. Ko˙ zuch, B.; Sienkiewicz-Małyjurek, K. Collaborative Performance In Public Safety Management Process.
In Transdisciplinary and Communicative Action, Proceedings of the 5th International Conference Lumen 2014,
Targoviste, Romania, 21–22 November 2014; Frunza, A., Ciulei, T., Sandu, A., Eds.; Medimond S.r.l.: Bologna,
Italy, 2015; pp. 401–409.
39. Ko˙ zuch, B.; Sienkiewicz-Małyjurek, K. Mapowanie procesów współpracy mi˛edzyorganizacyjnej na
przykładzie działan´ realizowanych w bezpieczen´ stwie publicznym. Zarza˛dzanie Publiczne, 2015.
forthcoming. (In Polish)
40. Sienkiewicz-Małyjurek, K.; Koz˙uch, B. System zarza˛dzania bezpieczen´ stwem publicznym w uje˛ciu teorii
zło ˙zono´sci. Opracowanie modelowe. Bezpiecze ´nstwo i Technika Po˙zarnicza 2015, 37, 33–43. (In Polish)
41. Ko˙ zuch, B.; Sienkiewicz-Małyjurek, K. New Requirements for Managers of Public Safety Systems. Procedia
Soc. Behav. Sci. 2014, 149, 472–478. [CrossRef]
42. Grudzewski, W.M.; Hejduk, I.K.; Sankowska, A.; Wa´ ntuchowicz, M. Sustainability w biznesie, czyli
przedsie˛biorstwo przyszłos´ci, zmiany paradygmatów i koncepcji zarza˛dzania;Wydawnictwo Poltext: Warszawa,
Poland, 2010. (In Polish)
43. Mah, D.N.; Hills, P. Collaborative governance for sustainable development: Wind resource assessment in
Xinjiang and Guangdong Provinces, China. Sustain. Dev. 2012, 20, 85–97. [CrossRef]
44. Røiseland, A. Understanding local governance: Institutional forms of collaboration. Public Adm. 2011, 89,
879–893. [CrossRef]
45. Considine, M. Governance networks and the question of transformation. Public Adm. 2013, 91, 438–447.
[CrossRef]
46. Lee, I.W.; Feiock, R.C.; Lee, Y. Competitors and Cooperators: A Micro-Level Analysis of Regional Economic
Development Collaboration Networks. Public Adm. Rev. 2012, 72, 253–262. [CrossRef]
47. Lozano, R. Collaboration as a Pathway for Sustainability. Sustain. Dev. 2007, 15, 370–381. [CrossRef]
48. Mattessich, P.W.; Murray-Close, M.; Monsey, B.R. Collaboration: What Makes It Work; Amherst H. Wilder
Foundation: Saint Paul, MN, USA, 2001.
49. Thomson, A.M.; Perry, J.L. Collaboration process: Inside the black box. Public Adm. Rev. 2006, 66, 20–32.
[CrossRef]
50. Arya, B.; Lin, Z. Understanding collaboration outcomes from an extended resource-based view perspective:
The roles of organizational characteristics, partner attributes, and network structures. J. Manag. 2007, 33,
697–723. [CrossRef]
51. Hansen, M.T.; Nohria, N. How to build collaborative advantage. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 2004, 46, 4–12.
52. Hardy, C.; Phillips, N.; Lawrence, T.B. Resources, Knowledge and Influence: The Organizational Effects of
Interorganizational Collaboration. J. Manag. Stud. 2003, 40, 321–347. [CrossRef]
53. Powell,W.W.; Koput, K.W.; Smith-Doerr, L. Interorganizational collaboration and the locus of innovation:
Networks of learning in biotechnology. Adm. Sci. Q. 1996, 41, 116–146. [CrossRef]
54. Berlin, J.M.; Carlström, E.D. Why is collaboration minimised at the accident scene? A critical study of a
hidden phenomenon. Disaster Prev. Manag. 2011, 20, 159–171. [CrossRef]
55. Kaiser, F.M. Interagency Collaborative Arrangements and Activities: Types, Rationales, Considerations;
Congressional Research Service: Washington, DC, USA, 2011.
56. McGuire, M. Collaborative Public Management: Assessing What We Know and How We Know It.
Public Adm. Rev. 2006, 66, 33–43. [CrossRef]
57. Perrault, E.; McClelland, R.; Austin, C.; Sieppert, J. Working Together in Collaborations: Successful Process
Factors for Community Collaboration. Adm. Soc. Work 2011, 5, 282–298. [CrossRef]
58. Malone, T.W.; Crowston, K. What is coordination theory and how can it help design cooperative work
systems. In Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported CooperativeWork, Los Angeles, CA,
USA, 7–10 October 1990.
324
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
59. Hartgerink, J.M.; Cramm, J.M.; Bakker, T.J.E.M.; van Eijsden, R.A.M.; Mackenbach, J.P.; Nieboer, A.P.
The importance of relational coordination for integrated care delivery to older patients in the hospital.
J. Nurs. Manag. 2014, 22, 248–256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. Hossain, L.; Uddin, S. Design patterns: Coordination in complex and dynamic environments.
Disaster Prev. Manag. 2012, 21, 336–350. [CrossRef]
61. Malone, T.W.; Crowston, K. The interdisciplinary study of coordination. ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR) 1994,
26, 87–119. [CrossRef]
62. Lie, A. Coordination processes and outcomes in the public service: The challenge of inter-organizational
food safety coordination in Norway. Public Adm. 2011, 89, 401–417. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Bond, J.B.; Gittell, J.H. Cross-agency coordination of offender reentry: Testing collaboration outcomes.
J. Crim. Justice 2010, 38, 118–129. [CrossRef]
64. Jones, C.; Hesterly, W.S.; Borgatti, S.P. A General Theory of Network Governance: Exchange Conditions and
Social Mechanisms. Acad. Manag. Rev. 1997, 22, 911–945.
65. De Pablos Heredero, C.; Haider, S.; García Martínez, A. Relational coordination as an indicator of teamwork
quality: Potential application to the success of e-learning at universities. Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Learn. 2015,
10, 4–8. [CrossRef]
66. Provan, K.G.; Kenis, P. Modes of Network Governance: Structure, Management, and Effectiveness. J. Public
Adm. Res. Theory 2008, 18, 229–252. [CrossRef]
67. Carlson, E.J. Collaboration and Confrontation in Interorganizational Coordination: Preparing to Respond to
Disasters. Available online: https://docs.google.com/viewer?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.ideals.illinois.
edu%2Fbitstream%2Fhandle%2F2142%2F50617%2FElizabeth_Carlson.pdf%3Fsequence%3D1 (accessed on
11 January 2016).
68. Grandori, A. An Organizational Assessment of Interfirm Coordination Modes. Organ. Stud. 1997, 18,
897–925. [CrossRef]
69. Van De Ven, A.H.; Delbecq, A.L.; Koenig, R.J. Determinants of coordination modes within organizations.
Am. Sociol. Rev. 1976, 41, 322–338.
70. Martinez, J.I.; Jarillo, J.C. The Evolution of Research on Coordination Mechanisms in Multinational
Corporations. J. Int. Bus. Stud. 1989, 20, 489–514. [CrossRef]
71. Hossain, L.; Kuti, M. Disaster response preparedness coordination through social networks. Disasters 2010,
34, 755–786. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. Mintzberg, H. The Structuring of Organizations; Prentice-Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA, 1979.
73. Drabek, T.E. Community Processes: Coordination. In Handbook of Disaster Research; Rodríguez, H.,
Quarantelli, E.L., Dynes, R.R., Eds.; Springer Science + Business Media: New York, NY, USA, 2007;
pp. 217–233.
74. Abbasi, A.; Owen, C.; Hossain, L.; Hamra, J. Social connectedness and adaptive team coordination during
fire events. Fire Saf. J. 2013, 59, 30–36. [CrossRef]
75. Morris, J.C.; Morris, E.D.; Jones, D.M. Reaching for the Philosopher’s Stone: Contingent Coordination and
the Military’s Response to Hurricane Katrina. Public Adm. Rev. 2007, 67, 94–106. [CrossRef]
76. Comfort, L.; Dunn, M.; Johnson, D.; Skertich, R.; Zagorecki, A. Coordination in complex systems: Increasing
efficiency in disaster mitigation and response. Int. J. Emerg. Manag. 2004, 2, 63–80. [CrossRef]
77. Kapucu, N. Interorganizational Coordination in Dynamic Context: Networks in Emergency Response
Management. Connections 2005, 26, 33–48.
78. Wise, C.R. Organizing for Homeland Security after Katrina: Is Adaptive Management What’s Missing?
Public Adm. Rev. 2006, 66, 302–318. [CrossRef]
79. Bolland, J.M.; Wilson, J.V. Three Faces of Integrative Coordination: A Model of Interorganizational Relations
in Community-Based Health and Human Services. HSR Health Services Res. 1994, 29, 341–366.
80. Leung, Z.C.S. Boundary Spanning in Interorganizational Collaboration. Adm. Soc. Work 2013, 37, 447–457.
[CrossRef]
81. Patel, H.; Pettitt, M.; Wilson, J.R. Factors of collaborative working: A framework for a collaboration model.
Appl. Ergon. 2012, 43, 1–26. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Ales, M.W.; Rodrigues, S.B.; Snyder, R.; Conklin, M. Developing and Implementing an Effective Framework
for Collaboration: The Experience of the CS2day Collaborative. J. Contin. Educ. Health Prof. 2011, 31, 13–20.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
325
Sustainability 2016, 8, 123
83. Ansell, C.; Gash, A. Collaborative Governance in Theory and Practice. J. Public Adm. Res. Theory 2007, 18,
543–571. [CrossRef]
84. Chen, B. Antecedents or Processes? Determinants of Perceived Effectiveness of Interorganizational
Collaborations for Public Service Delivery. Int. Public Manag. J. 2010, 13, 381–407. [CrossRef]
85. Daley, D.M. Interdisciplinary Problems and Agency Boundaries: Exploring Effective Cross-Agency
Collaboration. J. Public Adm. Res. Theory 2009, 19, 477–493. [CrossRef]
86. Emerson, K.; Nabatchi, T.; Balogh, S. An integrative framework for collaborative governance. J. Public Adm.
Res. Theory 2011, 22, 1–30. [CrossRef]
87. Fedorowicz, J.; Gogan, J.L.;Williams, C.B. A collaborative network for first responders: Lessons from the
CapWIN case. Gov. Inf. Q. 2007, 24, 785–807. [CrossRef]
88. Franco, M. Determining factors in the success of strategic alliances: An empirical study performed in
Portuguese firms. Eur. J. Int. Manag. 2011, 5, 608–632. [CrossRef]
89. Olson, C.A.; Balmer, J.T.; Mejicano, G.C. Factors Contributing to Successful Interorganizational Collaboration:
The Case of CS2day. J. Contin. Educ. Health Prof. 2011, 31, 3–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
90. Raišien˙ e, A.G. Sustainable Development of Inter-Organizational Relationships and Social Innovations.
J. Secur. Sustain. Issues 2012, 2, 65–76. [CrossRef]
91. Ranade, W.; Hudson, B. Conceptual issues in inter-agency collaboration. Local Gov. Stud. 2003, 29, 32–50.
[CrossRef]
92. The National Headquarters of the State Fire Service of Poland. Biuletyn Informacyjny Pa´nstwowej
Stra ˙zy Po˙ zarnej za Rok 2010. Available online: http://www.straz.gov.pl/aktualnosci/biuletyn
_roczny_psp_za_rok_2010 (accessed on 26 January 2016). (In Polish).
93. Reddy, M.C.; Paul, S.A.; Abraham, J.; McNeese, M.; DeFlitch, C.; Yen, J. Challenges to effective crisis
management: Using information and communication technologies to coordinate emergency medical services
and emergency department teams. Int. J. Med. Inf. 2009, 78, 259–269. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94. European Commission; Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection. Emergency Response Coordination
Centre, ECHO Factsheet. Available online: http://ec.europa.eu/echo/files/aid/countries/factsheets/
thematic/ERC_en.pdf (accessed on 20 September 2015).
95. Internetowy System Aktów Prawnych. Ustawa z Dnia 22 Listopada 2013 r. o Systemie Powiadamiania
Ratunkowego (Dz.U. 2013 poz. 1635); Available online: http://isap.sejm.gov.pl/DetailsServlet?id=WDU20130
001635 (accessed on 27 January 2016). (In Polish)
96. Asees, M.S. Tsunami Disaster Prevention in Sri Lanka. Available online: http://www. jamco.or.jp/en/
symposium/21/3/ (accessed on 28 September 2015).
97. Sienkiewicz-Małyjurek, K. The Flow of Information About the Actions Required in Emergency Situations:
Issues in Urban Areas in Poland. Int. J. Soc. Sustain. Econ. Soc. Cult. Context 2013, 8, 61–71.
98. Aedo, I.; Díaz, P.; Carroll, J.M.; Convertino, G.; Rosson, M.B. End-user oriented strategies to facilitate
multi-organizational adoption of emergency management information systems. Inf. Process. Manag. 2010, 46,
11–21. [CrossRef]
99. Lee,W.B.;Wang, Y.;Wang,W.M.; Cheung, C.F. An unstructured information management system (UIMS)
for emergency management. Expert Syst. Appl. 2012, 39, 12743–12758. [CrossRef]
100. Juan, L.J.; Li, Q.; Liua, C.; Khana, S.U.; Ghani, N. Community-based collaborative information system for
emergency management. Comput. Oper. Res. 2014, 42, 116–124.
101. Grandori, A.; Soda, G. Inter-firm networks: Antecedents, mechanisms and forms. Organ. Stud. 1995, 16,
183–214. [CrossRef]
102. Gardet, E.; Mothe, C. The dynamics of coordination in innovation networks. Eur. Manag. Rev. 2011, 8,
213–229. [CrossRef]
103. Gittell, J.H.; Weiss, L. Coordination Networks Within and Across Organizations: A Multi-level Framework.
J. Manag. Stud. 2004, 41, 127–153. [CrossRef]
© 2016 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
326
Article
Environmental Aspects of Social Responsibility of
Public Sector Organizations
Liliana Hawrysz * and Joachim Foltys
Department of Organization and Management, Faculty of Economy and Management,
Opole University of Technology, Opole 45-758, Poland; joachimfol@onet.pl
* Correspondence: l.hawrysz@po.opole.pl
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 2 October 2015; Accepted: 9 December 2015; Published: 25 December 2015
Abstract: In addition to determining social responsibility policies that affect the market and social
actors, certain governments also set objectives related to their internal activity. For example, one
of the activities of the German government is to implement the concept of social responsibility
into public institutions. In the Netherlands, one of the government tasks is to set an example for
responsible practices (government as a role model). The aim of this paper is to examine firstly
whether public sector entities set an example for responsible practices, especially with regard to
respect for the environment, and secondly, whether public sector organizations in Poland significantly
differ from organizations abroad in terms of their practices in the field of environmental protection.
A questionnaire was a basis for data collection. The questionnaires were distributed to representatives
of deliberately selected public sector organizations located primarily in Europe. The study was
conducted in 2012–2013 on a group of 220 public sector organizations (102 Polish and 118 other
European). The paper presents only the selected part of research. Public sector organizations in
Poland do not have internal mechanisms of environmental responsibility. There is a significant
discrepancy between the state of the environmental responsibility of organizations located in Poland
and abroad. Obtained results show that public sector organizations, those in Poland in particular, are
making their first steps in developing internal environmental responsibility.
Keywords: CSR; government as a role model; public sector organizations; environment
1. Introduction
Corporate social responsibility derives from three dimensions: human, environmental and
economic (Triple P: People, Planet, Profit) [1]. Business organizations intend to take responsibility for
their development processes, which take place both inside and outside their organization. However,
public sector organizations are mostly expected to support business entities in this respect [2]. The issue
discussed less often concerns public sector organizations as socially responsible entities, that is those
seeking to increase the transparency and verifiability of actions taken, creating friendly conditions
for reforms. However, besides determining CSR policies that affect the market and social actors,
particular governments set objectives related to their own social activity. In the German government
program (National Strategy for Sustainable Development), one of the government's actions is to
implement the CSR concept in public institutions. In the Netherlands, one of the government tasks
is to set an example for responsible practices (government as a role model). In countries such as
France, the United Kingdom and Belgium, the governments have set goals for sustainable/green
procurement [3]. This way of perceiving public sector organizations shows a duality of their role
in relation to social responsibility. The dual role of public sector organizations is reduced to two
dimensions, external and internal. The external dimension, far more recognizable in the literature [4–9],
concerns promotion of the corporate social responsibility concept in the business environment. The
Sustainability 2016, 8, 19; doi:10.3390/su8010019 327 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 19
internal dimension applies to public sector organizations as socially responsible entities, not only
because of the implementation of the tasks assigned to these units and undertaken in close correlation
with the objectives that an entity should pursue, but primarily as a result of efforts to build mutual trust
and transparency in relationships with both the external and internal environment of the organization.
These activities are designed to create a well-established, solid belief that the funds allocated to the
administration are spent efficiently, while providing maximum benefits for a society. The external and
internal dimensions should remain in balance. If any of these dimensions is ailing, the credibility of
the organization is undermined. The external dimension is far more recognizable in the literature,
which is why this paper focuses on the internal dimension. Environmental responsibility is one of the
main aspects of social responsibility. Corporate Environmental Responsibility (CER) simply means
the incorporation of responsibility assumptions towards the environment in the strategic policy of
the organization [10]. As research findings indicate, four elements affect the effectiveness of actions
concerning environmental responsibility (the internal dimension): implementing the environmental
policy into the organization strategic documents and everyday activities, stimulating employees’
awareness, increasing the amount and scope of responsibility for the environment, concerns the
introduction of environmental responsibility into the core values of the organization [7]. The survey
questions used in the paper are based on these key activities. Due to historical heritage, public sector
organizations in Poland have never been the leader of implementing modern methods of management.
While leading European countries were improving their management tools, organizations in Poland
had just started to implement them. This time difference is the reason for comparing environmental
protection practices in organizations located in and outside Poland to find out if they are as different
as expected.
There are empirical studies examining environmental sustainability in public sector organizations,
but the majority of them have a single-country focus [11–15]. There are only a few studies that have a
multi-country environmental focus [16,17], but none of them include Polish organizations.
The aim of this paper is to examine firstly whether public sector organizations set an example for
responsible practices, especially with regard to respect for the environment, and secondly, whether
public sector organizations in Poland significantly differ from organizations abroad in terms of their
practices in the field of environmental protection. Therefore, two hypotheses were formulated for the
purpose of research.
Hypothesis 1. Public sector organizations set an example for responsible practices in respect for
the environmental protection.
Hypothesis 2. Public sector organizations in Poland differ significantly from organizations located
abroad in terms of their practices concerning the environmental protection.
The basis for collecting information for research was a questionnaire sent to representative of
deliberately selected public sector organizations located primarily in Europe. The study was conducted
in 2012–2013 on a group of 220 public sector organizations.
2. Literature Review
The first model for social responsibility that focused on decision making was shaped by
Carroll [18]. Hawken identified sustainability problems and discussed business-related solutions,
which, in his opinion, could transform both companies and the economy, and possibly improve
profitability [19]. However, the financial aspect of the activity is not the main one in public sector
organization [20]. In the public sector, compared to the corporate sector, accountability expectations and
obligations have always been higher. New public management reforms put pressure on public sector
organizations to demonstrate their financial and non-financial performance. The demand is particularly
relevant for public sector organizations considering that they create public value while acting in an
entrepreneurial way [17,21]. Public sector organizations are expected to be more environmentally
responsible than private companies as they are legitimated by public contracts. Government and
public sector organizations have a special role to play as guarantors of public values. Moore believes
328
Sustainability 2016, 8, 19
that citizens want from their governments some combination of the following that together encompass
public value: (1) high-performing service-oriented public bureaucracies, (2) public organizations that
are efficient and effective in achieving desired social outcomes, and (3) public organizations that
operate justly and fairly, and lead to just and fair conditions in the society at large [22]. That is why
public sector organizations are obligated to citizens to operate in a sustainable way.
As previously mentioned, the role of public sector organizations in relation to social responsibility
is reduced to two dimensions: external and internal. As far as the external dimension of social
responsibility of public sector organizations is concerned, four institutional models are identified in
the literature: observer, patron, promoter, and partner [3]. These models differ mainly in the degree
to which the state takes responsibility for coordinating activities related to the implementation of
the CSR concept. In the first model (the observer), there is no leader responsible for coordinating
activities related to corporate social responsibility and the burden of promoting this concepts rests on
socio-economic partners. In the second model (the patron), there is no leader either, but the burden
of promoting the concept of corporate social responsibility rests on the government administration.
The third model (the promoter) is characterized by government coordination of activities promoting
the CRS concept by the institution acting as the leader. In addition, government is responsible for
publishing guidelines, standards and other forms of support for development of social responsibility
idea. The fourth model (the partner) is characterized by the presence of leading governmental
institution coordinating the activities of other ministries, as well as advisory bodies or centers for
promotion of social responsibility. Simultaneously, government actions create the framework for
bottom-up initiatives of involved socio-economic partners, leading to a greater coherence of activities
and effect of synergy [3]. A slightly different typology has been proposed in the document prepared by
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the World Bank [23,24]. In this
typology, the model of the observer has not been included and a forcing attitude appears instead,
which consists in imposing the implementation of corporate social responsibility, for example by
appropriate legislation, regulations, guidelines, audits, legal or fiscal penalties, etc. [23–25]. In the
literature, a great deal of attention is devoted to describing and diagnosing the institutional models
of social responsibility promotion. The analysis shows that patron and partner and forcing attitude
models [24] are the least favorable. In the case of successful models, we deal with active presence of
government administration authorities in intensifying efforts to promote social responsibility.
The internal dimension applies to public sector organizations as socially responsible entities,
because of the efforts to build mutual trust and transparency both in relationships with the external
and internal environment of the organization. These activities are designed to create a well-established,
solid belief that the funds allocated to the administration are spent efficiently, while providing
maximum benefits for a society.
Hypothesis 1. Public sector organizations set an example for responsible practices in respect for
the environmental protection.
Hypothesis 2. Public sector organizations in Poland differ significantly from organizations located
abroad in terms of their practices concerning the environmental protection.
According to Elkington, environmental responsibility is one of the dimensions of social
responsibility, in addition to economic and social ones [26]. Corporate Environmental Responsibility
(CER) simply means incorporation of responsibility assumptions towards the environment in the
strategic policy of the organization [10]. Among the organizations operating on the market, two
orientations that are not mutually exclusive in the movement for environmental responsibility can be
distinguished: obligatory and optional. Obligatory (external) orientation takes the form of three types
of isomorphism: coercive, mimetic and normative. Coercive isomorphism arises when organizations
include in their activities the need to respect the environment in response to legal regulations; mimetic
isomorphism is the result of a reference of one organization to the other, more effective one, and
normative isomorphism is dictated by the requirement to improve organization’s collective image.
329
Sustainability 2016, 8, 19
Optional (internal) orientation involves organization’s commitment to build competitive advantage
based on the value and uniqueness [27].
Many authors agree that the absence of an institutional framework in promoting respect for
the environment contributes to the fact that companies undertake activities of a limited nature,
which do not always meet the expectations of local communities. The macroeconomic nature of
the majority of policies and guidelines does not have an operationalized character and therefore
requires actions at the microeconomic level [27]. Since an economic activity may result in a
negative impact on the environment, there is a commitment to take responsibility for this condition.
The commitment translates into developing such activities that are socially responsible, that aim
at creating a society responsible for the environment on a voluntary basis and beyond the legal
expectations [28]. This means that obligatory orientation is a starting point for actions, but only
optional orientation makes these actions more meaningful. Optional orientation leads to the situation
where responsibility for the environment is a fundamental need and commitment towards the next
generations, and not the consequence of strict respect for the law. Obligatory orientation in Poland
in the movement for environmental responsibility stems from, inter alia, the environmental policy
for 2009–2012 with the perspective to 2016 [29]. The following are recognized as the most important
directions of systemic actions:
‚ consideration of environmental principles in sector strategies
‚ activation of the market to protect the environment
‚ environmental management
‚ participation of society in the environmental protection
‚ development of research and technical progress
‚ liability for environmental damage
‚ ecological aspect in spatial planning
As research findings indicate, four elements affect the effectiveness of actions concerning
environmental responsibility (the internal dimension). The first element is implementing the
environmental policy into the organization strategic documents and everyday activities undertaken by
the organization. The second one is stimulating employees’ awareness and their responsibility for the
environment. The third one is increasing the amount and scope of responsibility for the environment
(e.g., to modify existing processes so that they will be more beneficial to the environment). The
fourth element concerns the introduction of environmental responsibility into the core values of the
organization [7].
An environmental policy is a publicly accessible document defining the organization’s intentions
toward the environment. Its content is the foundation for the entire system [30]. This policy determines
an overall direction for the organization’s environmental activities and establishes principles, which
will guide the organization in environmental matters. An environmental policy becomes a point of
reference against which organizational activities will be assessed. Moreover, an environmental policy
is crucial for the process of communication with employees, and local communities, depicting the
priorities of the organization for the environment protection [31]. Through the policy, the organization
demonstrates that it is aware of its impact on the environment and surroundings and voluntarily
commits to minimize the negative impact on the environment. An environmental policy serves as a
landmark—the benchmark for taken actions. Strategic initiatives that are crucial for developing the
environmental policy are formulated [32,33].
An environmental policy itself is not sufficient as it outlines only a general direction for
activities. Without developing programs to measure and analyze the impact of the organization
on the environment, it is impossible to give the policy a lasting nature [34]. Without operationalization,
the policy is merely declarative. Measurement and analysis programs provide access to information so
that decisions can be better, and above all, they take into account the welfare of local communities.
In addition, these programs allow for identifying areas that need improvement, as well as setting
330
Sustainability 2016, 8, 19
priorities for undertaken activities [35]. They also allow effective risk management. Measurement and
analysis programs identifying organization’s impact on the environment allow for creating a reference
point for the organization's activities [34]. Without measuring the scope of this impact, it is impossible
to manage the area in accordance with the principle “you cannot manage what you do not measure”.
Programs and actions for the most efficient use of natural resources are the recent trend in
activities undertaken on a broad international level [36]. Nations around the world recognize the value
of natural resources and they focus on their bigger protection and sustainable development. In 2012,
the United Kingdom founded the Natural Capital Committee, whose role is to identify priorities for
actions supporting and improving the use of natural resources. It has also begun preparations to
integrate the value of natural resources into the calculation of GDP by 2020 [37]. Therefore, it can be
assumed that programs and actions for the most efficient use of natural resources will be growing in
significance in the next few years [36,38–40].
Because public sector organizations in Poland started to implement modern methods of
management later than more developed countries, they are expected to be different.
Hypothesis 2. Public sector organizations in Poland differ significantly from organizations located
abroad in terms of their practices concerning the environmental protection.
All these elements have internal character and consist of building individual environmental
responsibility of employees in organizations and implementing responsibility in the organizational
culture. The paper attempts to answer the question as to whether public sector organizations,
in addition to taking responsibility for coordinating activities related to implementing the concept of
corporate social responsibility, have also developed internal mechanisms concerning CSR. Moreover,
we will consider whether this has an impact on the economic environment, and if, at the same time
they can be seen as setting an example, this gives the organization credibility.
3. Methodology
The basis for collecting information for research was a questionnaire sent to representatives of
deliberately selected public sector organizations located primarily in Europe. The study was conducted
in 2012–2013 on a group of 220 public sector organizations. Three questions of a general nature were
chosen from the questionnaire and subjected to statistical analysis. Questions were chosen in order to
place the actions taken by public organizations in an appropriate time context. Since the works on the
environmental policy began in the international arena roughly in the 1970s, the actions undertaken by
organizations aimed at formulating their environmental policy served to keep up with international
trends and are characterized by focus on the past. Interest in data analysis software and programs for
reducing negative impact on the environment are relatively new as they cover the past 10–15 years [35],
but not everything has been refined in this area [34]. Therefore, it can be considered as a focus on the
present. Orientation on activities and programs aimed at the most efficient use of natural resources is
the most current trend in the international arena, so far widely discussed [36,38–40], which is why the
actions taken in this field are focused on the future.
4. Participants and Procedure
Research included public sector organizations, among others ministries and central offices,
province offices, marshal offices, district offices, municipal offices, tax offices and chambers, and
customs chambers. All public sector organizations registered in the EIPA database (European
Institution of Public Administration) were invited to participate in the study. In this way, 1739
(according to EIPA data as of 30 November 2011) public sector organizations located outside Poland
and 269 (according to EIPA data as of 30 November 2011) organizations located in Poland were
identified. An invitation to participate in the study was sent via post to all organizations registered in
the EIPA database. Research was conducted from November 2012 to May 2013. A total number of
2008 questionnaires were distributed to organizations’ representatives, 220 completed questionnaires
were returned, giving a rate of return of 11%. Not all of the questionnaires were suitable for further
331
Sustainability 2016, 8, 19
analysis. A total of 269 entities were located in Poland (according to EIPA data as of 30 November
2011). All of these organizations were invited to participate in research. Only 102 organizations agreed
to participate in research, which gave a return rate of 38%. However, outside Poland, the largest group
of organizations was represented by Belgium (12), Portugal (11), the Czech Republic (10), Italy (10),
Finland (9 ), Germany (8), and Norway (6). The research was a trial project.
5. Instrument/Survey and Data Analysis
The questionnaire contained 46 questions with answers: yes, no, I do not know. The questions
were arranged in the following way: the first questions concerned general issues, and the following
questions expanded them. Generally, the questionnaire related to three dimensions of the public
sector organizations’ functioning: human, environmental and economic. The aim of the study was to
investigate the state and prospects of development of the Corporate Social Responsibility concept in
public sector organizations in Poland and abroad. The paper presents only a part of the research on
the environmental aspects of corporate social responsibility. Other parts of the research are presented
in the papers [41,42].
The analysis of relationships between variables was conducted using a chi-square independence
test together with strength measures (Cramer’s V and C contingency coefficient). The significance
level α = 0.05 was assumed. The results were considered statistically significant when the calculated
test probability p satisfies the inequality p < 0.05.
Detailed results of the analysis of three most important environmental responsibility actions are
summarized in Table 1.
Table 1. Organizations’ environmental responsibility.
Environmental Responsibility Actions Poland Abroad χ² df p C V
have clearly defined environmental policy based on the
principles of sustainable development 54% 57% 3.30 2 0.19 0.13 0.13
have developed programs of analysis and reduction of
organization’s negative influence on environment 22% 58% 2.27 2 0.00 0.36 0.34
actions or programs aimed to make the most efficient
use of natural resources are considered as priority 24% 56% 24.15 2 0.00 0.34 0.32
Source: own elaboration on the basis of survey results.
6. Results
6.1. Clearly Defined Environmental Policy Based on the Principles of Sustainable Development
In the research group, 54% of public sector organizations located in Poland and 57% of
organizations abroad declare that they have the defined environmental policy. The analysis result
of a chi-square test does not show the statistically significant relationship between a clearly defined
environmental policy and location of the organization.
6.2. Developed Programs of Analysis and Reduction of Organization’s Negative Influence on Environment
In the studied group, 22% of organizations located in Poland and 58% abroad declare that they
have developed a program for analyzing and reducing the negative impact of their activities on the
environment. The analysis result of a chi-square test shows significant correlation between location of
the organization and their programs for analyzing and reducing the negative impact of the organization
on the environment (χ² = 26.27, df = 2, p = 0.00000). Organizations located outside Poland often declare
that they have these kinds of programs. The strength of this correlation is average (C = 0.36, V = 0.34).
6.3. Actions or Programs Aimed to Make the Most Efficient Use of Natural Resources are Considered as Priority
In the surveyed group, 24% of organizations located in Poland and 56% located abroad declare
that they treat projects or programs aimed at the most effective use of natural resources as a priority in
332
Sustainability 2016, 8, 19
their actions. The analysis result of a chi-square test shows significant correlation between location
of the organization, and their declaration to treat projects and programs aimed at the most effective
use of natural resources as a priority (χ² = 24.15, df = 2, p = 0,00000). Organizations located outside
Poland more often declare that they treat projects or programs aimed at the most efficient use of natural
resources as a priority in their activities. The strength of this correlation is average (C = 0.34, V = 0.32).
7. Discussion
Research shows that more than half of public sector organizations located in Poland declare that
they have clearly defined environmental policies concerning organization's intentions towards the
environment. The content of these policies is the foundation for the entire system; it is the starting point
for undertaking environmental actions and establishing principles that will guide the organization
in issues concerning the environment. Detailed analysis of environmental policies of organizations
located in Poland shows that a large part of formulated policies concerns operation of external actors,
primarily companies (e.g., introduction of rational and modern solutions for efficient water and
wastewater management, improvement and rationalization of waste management system, systematic
reduction of air pollution, water and soil pollution, reduction of traffic nuisance, monitoring of harmful
factors in the city and their supervision and control, etc.). Only a small number of organizations
formulated environmental policies with regard to their own activities, e.g., reducing water and
energy use, reducing the amount of chemicals used, systematic training of office employees on the
procedures concerning the implementation of pro-environmental actions, support of projects related
to the environmental education and sustainable development based on three-sector cooperation,
promoting pro-environmental behaviors among employees, customers, suppliers and subcontractors
by bringing responsibility for the environment to their attention and promoting specific measures for
environment protection, in particular promoting the principles of sustainable development, etc. [19].
Formulating the environmental policy, public sector organizations focus largely on supporting the
concept of environmental responsibility in the business environment rather than on setting goals for
their business activity. This way of formulating policies without taking into account the declarations
towards the environment issues has contributed to a lack of programs aiming at reducing the negative
impact of the organization’s activity [21,22].
In these organizations, there was not simply a reference point for their formulation, but also
for the optimal use of natural resources treated as a priority in the undertaken activities. The way
of formulating environmental policies in Polish public sector organizations is general in its nature
and mostly does not directly concern the activities of that particular organization, making it difficult
to develop programs of analysis and reduction of the negative impact of their operations on the
environment. It also makes it difficult to treat projects and programs aimed at the most efficient use of
natural resources as a priority in business activities. Polish and foreign organizations vary in terms
of having data analyzing programs and optimal use of natural resources. The obtained results allow
for rejecting the first hypothesis. Public sector organizations do not set an example of responsible
practices in respect for the environment. Hypothesis 2 was verified. The results show that public sector
organizations in Poland differ significantly from organizations located outside Poland in terms of their
practices for the environmental protection. Activities undertaken in Polish organizations allow for
classifying the dominant, in their view, orientation to focus on the past trends, while more than half of
organizations located outside Poland are actively involved in the implementation of current trends.
Others studies show a higher degree of environmental responsibility of public sector
organizations [16]. However, it is really hard to compare the results of the studies because there
are only a few studies which have a multi-country environmental focus [16,17].
8. Limitation of the Study
The research was a trial project. Its aim was to examine the state and prospects for development
of the Corporate Social Responsibility concept in public sector organizations in Poland and abroad.
333
Sustainability 2016, 8, 19
The issue of environmental responsibility accounted only for a small part of the study. Conducted
analyzes allowed for identifying a general trend in public sector organizations, which, however,
requires clarification. Completed studies are in some way a snapshot of organizations and temporary
reflection of the situation. It is necessary to construct reliable indicators of environmental responsibility
and employ them in a given time interval, e.g., two years. This would make it possible to capture
certain trends, as well as a full picture of the examined phenomena. The presented results should be
considered as a starting point for further, more extensive analyzes.
9. Conclusions
Public sector organizations in Poland do not have internal mechanisms of environmental
responsibility. Some organizations declare that they have their environmental policy, but it is of
a general nature and does not include the declaration of particular organizations. This situation leads
to the conclusion that first steps in creating environmental responsibility have been taken, and now
further steps are awaited. In particular, it concerns public sector organizations located in Poland. The
study has identified a significant discrepancy between the state of the environmental responsibility of
companies located in Poland and abroad.
Author Contributions: Author Contributions: This work is a result of collaboration between all authors. Author
Liliana Hawrysz designed the study and wrote the report. Author Joachim Foltys wrote the first draft of the
manuscript. Authors Liliana Hawrysz and Joachim Foltys reviewed the draft manuscript. All the authors managed
the literature searches, read and approved the final manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References and Notes
1. Grigore, G. Corporate Social Responsibility-strategies in European style. Ann. Univ. Oradea, Econ. Sci. Ser.
2008, 17, 662–665.
2. Letter of 4 November 2011 from the Minister for European Affairs and International Cooperation to the
House of Representatives on Development through Sustainable Enterprise, Parliamentary Papers, House of
Representatives, 2011–2012 session, 32 605, No. 56.
3. Analiza Instytucjonalnych Modeli Promocji CSR w Wybranych Krajach, Analiza przygotowana
dla Ministerstwa Gospodarki przez CSRinfo. Available online: http://odpowiedzialnybiznes.pl/
public/files/analiza_instytucjonalna_promocji_csr_CSRinfo_2011.pdf (accessed on 2 September 2015).
(In Polish)
4. Jankovi´c Mili´c, V.; Stankovi´c, J.; Marinkovi´c, S. The capacity of local governments to improve
business environment: Evidence from Serbia. Available online: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=2554337 (accessed on 8 December 2015).
5. Pesmatzoglou, D.; Nikolaou, I.E.; Evangelinos, K.I.; Allan, S. Extractive multinationals and corporate
social responsibility: A commitment towards achieving the goals of sustainable development or only a
management strategy? J. Int. Develop. 2014, 26, 187–206.
6. Min, B.S. The effect of outside board members on energy efficiency in Korea. J. Asia-Pacific Bus. 2014, 15,
54–72.
7. Shah, K.U. Strategic organizational drivers of corporate environmental responsibility in the Caribbean hotel
industry. Pol. Sci. 2011, 44, 321–344.
8. Com˘anescu, M. Increasing responsibility towards environment. Theor. Appl. Econ. 2010, 17, 59–72.
9. Butcher, B.; Xu, Y. Chinese cooperatives and environmental social responsibility. Chin. Econ. 2014, 47, 63–80.
[CrossRef]
10. Banerjee, S. Corporate environmentalism: The construct and its measurement. J. Bus. Resear. 2002, 55,
177–191. [CrossRef]
11. Burritt, R.L.;Welch, S. Australian commonwealth entities: An analysis of their environmental disclosures.
Abacus 1997, 33, 69–87. [CrossRef]
12. Fortes, H. The need for environmental reporting by companies: an examination of the use of environmental
reports by Swedish public companies. Green Manag. Int. 2002, 40, 77–92.
334
Sustainability 2016, 8, 19
13. Frost, G.R.; Seamer, M. Adoption of environmental reporting and management practices: An analysis of
New SouthWales public sector entities. Financ. Account. Manag. 2002, 18, 103–127. [CrossRef]
14. Lodhia, S.; Jacobs, K.; Park, Y.J. Driving public sector environmental reporting. The disclosure practices of
Australian commonwealth departments. Pub. Manag. Rev. 2012, 14, 631–647. [CrossRef]
15. Goswami, K.; Lodhia, S. Sustainability disclosure patterns of South Australian local Councils: A case study.
Publ. Money Manag. 2014, 34, 273–280. [CrossRef]
16. Lopatta, K.; Jaeschke, R. Sustainability reporting at German and Austrian universities. Int. J. Educ. Econ. Dev.
2014, 5, 66–90. [CrossRef]
17. Greiling, D.; Traxler, A.A.; Stötzer, S. Sustainability reporting in the Austrian, German and Swiss public
sector. Int. J. Public Sect. Manag. 2015, 28, 404–428.
18. Carroll, A.B. A three-dimensional conceptual model of corporate social performance. Acad. Manag. Rev.
1979, 4, 497–505.
19. Hashmi, M.A.; Al-Habib, M. Sustainability and carbon management practices in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia. J. Environ. Plann. Manag. 2013, 56, 140–157.
20. Moore, M.H. Creating Public Value. Strategic Management in Government; Harvard University Press:
Cambridge, MA, USA, 1995; p. 31.
21. Moore, M.H. Public value as the focus of strategy. Aust. J. Pub. Admin. 1994, 53, 296–303.
22. Bryson, J.M.; Crosby, B.C.; Bloomberg, L. Public value governance: Moving beyond traditional public
administration and the new public management. Pub. Admin. Rev. 2014, 74, 445–456. [CrossRef]
23. Ingram, V.; de Grip, K.; de Wildt, M.R.; Ton, G.; Douma, M.; Boone, K.; van Hoeven, H. Corporate Social
Responsibility: the Role of Public Policy: A Systematic Literature Review of the Effects of Government Supported
Interventions on the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Behaviour of Enterprises in Developing Countries;
The Hague: Policy and Operations Evaluation Department (IOB), Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Netherlands: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2013; p. 110.
24. Ward,H. Public Sector Roles in Strengthening Corporate Social Responsibility: Taking Stock. Available online:
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPSD/Resources/CSR/Taking_Stock.pdf (accessed on 9 December
2015).
25. Fox, T.; Ward, H.; Howard, B. Public Sector Roles in Strengthening Corporate Social Responsibility: A Baseline
Study. Available online: http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/
IB/2005/12/19/000090341_20051219091246/Rendered/PDF/346550CSR1CSR1interior.pdf (accessed on
9 December 2015).
26. Elkington, J. Cannibals With Forks: The Triple Bottom Line of the 21st Century Business; Capstone Publishing
Ltd.: Oxford, UK, 1997.
27. Pesmatzoglou, D.; Nikolaou, I.E.; Evangelinos, K.I.; Allan, S. Extractive multinationals and corporate social
responsibility: a commitment towards achieving the goals of sustainable development or only a management
strategy? J. Int. Dev. 2014, 26, 187–206. [CrossRef]
28. Nowakowska, A. The reverse logistics management with RFID application. Adv. Logist. Syst. 2008, 2, 41–46.
29. Warszawa. Polityka Ekologiczna Pan´ stwa W Latach 2009-2012, Z Perspektywa˛Do Roku 2016. Available
online: https://www.mos.gov.pl/g2/big/2009_11/8183a2c86f4d7e2cdf8c3572bdba0bc6.pdf (accessed on
2 September 2015).
30. Sulaiman, M.; Mokhtar, N. Ensuring sustainability: A preliminary study of environmental management
accounting in Malaysia. Int. J. Bus. Manag. Sci. 2012, 5, 85–102.
31. Sands, J.; Lee, K.H. Environmental and sustainability management accounting (EMA) for the development
of sustainability management and accountability. Issues Soc. Environ. Account. 2015, 9, 1–4.
32. Quental, N.; Lourenço, J.M.; da Silva, F.N. Sustainable development policy: Goals, targets and political
cycles. Sus. Dev. 2011, 19, 15–29. [CrossRef]
33. Herea, W. Policy and strategy for improving sustainable social development programmes. Environ. Eng.
Manag. J. 2010, 9, 861–868.
34. Burghelea, C. Analysis of sustainable tourism (ST) in Romania. Int. Audit. Risk Manag. 2015, 1, 31–42.
35. Bass, S. A New Era in Sustainable Development, An IIED Briefing. Available online: http://pubs.iied.org/
pdfs/11071IIED.pdf (accessed on 4 September 2015).
335
Sustainability 2016, 8, 19
36. Schaefer, M.; Goldman, E.; Bartuska, A.M.; Sutton-Grier, A.; Lubchenco, J. Nature as capital: Advancing and
incorporating ecosystem services in United States federal policies and programs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
2015, 112, 7383–7389. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Sullivan, S. The Natural Capital Myth; or will Accounting Save the World?; The Leverhulme Centre for the Study
of Value School of Environment, Education and Development, The University of Manchester: Oxford, UK,
2014.
38. Zhu, X.; van Ierland, E.C. Economic modelling for water quantity and quality management: A welfare
program approach. Water Resour. Manag. 2012, 26, 2491–2511. [CrossRef]
39. Meena, M.S.; Singh, K.M. Information and communications technologies for natural resources management.
J. Environ. Manag. Tour. 2013, 2, 77–92.
40. Calil, J.; Beck, M.W.; Gleason, M.; Merrifield, M.; Klausmeyer, K.; Newkirk, S. Aligning natural resource
conservation and flood hazard mitigation in California. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, 1–14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41. Hawrysz, L. Patronage vs. Implementation of the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Concept in the Public
Sector. In Proceedings of Advanced Research in Scientific Areas, Zilina, The Slovak Republic, 2–6 December
2013; EDIS—Publishing Institution of the University of ZilinaL: Zilina, The Slovak Republic, 2013; Volume 2,
pp. 184–187.
42. Hawrysz, L. Rola organizacji sektora publicznego w kształtowaniu społecznej odpowiedzialno´sci.
Zrównowa˙zony rozwój organizacji-aspekty społeczne 2015. (In Polish) [CrossRef]
© 2016 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
336
Article
A New Systematic Approach to Vulnerability
Assessment of Innovation Capability of
Construction Enterprises
Jingxiao Zhang 1,*, Haiyan Xie 2, Klaus Schmidt 2 and Hui Li 1,*
1 Institution of Construction Economics, Chang’an University; NO.161, Chang’an Road, Xi’an 710061, China
2 Department of Technology, Illinois State University; Normal, IL 61790, USA; hxie@ilstu.edu (H.X.);
kschmid@ilstu.edu (K.S.)
* Correspondence: zhangjingxiao@chd.edu.cn (J.Z.); lihui9922@chd.edu.cn (H.L.);
Tel.: +86-159-2973-9877 (J.Z.); +86-159-9138-5822 (H.L.)
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 5 October 2015; Accepted: 18 December 2015; Published: 25 December 2015
Abstract: The purpose of this research is to study the vulnerability of construction enterprises’
innovation capabilities (CEIC) and their respective primary influencing factors. This paper proposed
a vulnerability system framework of CEIC, designed two comprehensive assessments for analysis,
namely the entropy and set pair analysis method (E-SPA) and the principle cluster analysis and
SPA method (P-SPA), and compared grades to verify the vulnerability assessments. Further, the
paper quantitatively assessed the major influencing factors in facilitating management, reducing
vulnerability, and improving the ability of construction enterprises to respond to changes in the
construction industry. The results showed that vulnerability could be effectively and systematically
evaluated using E-SPA. However, managing or reducing entrepreneurial sensitivity and improving
the ability to respond was critical to supporting sustainable CEIC. The case studies included in this
paper suggested that in ensuring sustainable CEIC, companies should concentrate on highly educated
human resources, R&D investments, intellectual property related innovations, and government
support. This research provided a practical framework and established a sustainable strategy for
companies to manage their vulnerability in developing innovation capability. In addition, this
research presented an innovative and effective way to quantitatively analyze vulnerability which
offered a foundation to signify a new paradigm shift in construction sustainable development.
Keywords: construction enterprise; innovation capability; vulnerability assessment; innovation
uncertainty; sustainable development
1. Introduction
As a critical driver of the sustainable development of a nation, a region, an industry, or an
enterprise, innovation can provide a continual basis for sustainable socio-economic development and
growth. Construction innovation, as a sustainable driver and a crucial condition, represents the pulse
of construction economic development of any nation [1–3]. The innovative capabilities of construction
enterprises thus hold a key position in advancing industrial and national development [4,5]. The
current innovation status of the construction industry reflects the complex features of the industry [6].
As any nation or region will have demand for continued construction, statistics related to this
construction make up a major portion of an economy’s well-being. The innovation accomplishments
of construction enterprises are affected by the innovation efforts of other firms, and are achieved
through the continuing cooperation among industries for breakthroughs in products, processes, and
designs. These breakthroughs reflect the strength and innovative desires and interests of construction
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17; doi:10.3390/su8010017 337 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
companies. However, compared to other industries, there is a lack of focus on the diffusion rates of
innovation in different sectors of construction, such as building and civil infrastructure. Depending
on the developmental level of an economy, the need for civil infrastructure may vary. However,
innovation is needed at all levels of economic development [7]. Civil infrastructure companies are
large in size and have potential for radical innovations, while residential construction companies
are usually small and give limited consideration as to how to effectively convert new research and
development into innovation. Often, large companies do not invest sufficiently in innovation as they
already dominate a major portion of the existing market. Smaller companies on the other hand need to
demonstrate higher degrees of innovation in order to enter or even stay in the market [8]. A similar
observation was made by Hultgren and Tantawi [9] in the study of potential radical innovation in
large firms.
However, researchers recently noticed that sustainable economic development has its vulnerability,
which was considered as a new paradigm shift in the analysis of uncertainty in economic studies of
system sensitivity and response capability. Vulnerability research has a wide range of applications,
including climate change prediction, natural disaster prevention, food security, and public health
improvement [10–21]. Generally, innovation vulnerability relates to the risk or uncertainty of a
company’s innovation capability. Therefore, eliminating risks or identifying weaknesses is perhaps
a preferred method of overcoming vulnerability. Elimination should, however, not simply lead to
the avoidance of uncertainty when studying innovation capability, because uncertainty can sense
or trace new directions or paths of economic development and thereby represents an innovative
strength [18,19]. This new cognitive reasoning requires firms to treat uncertainty as part of innovation
capability and develop a strategy to overcome it, or manage uncertainty instead of eliminating it.
Construction entrepreneurs should consider the opportunities stemming from uncertainties as well.
With this understanding, it is a crucial prerequisite for successful promotion of construction enterprise’s
innovation capability (CEIC) to develop and implement a strategy when managing the uncertainty
that is part of CEIC. However, there is still a lack of quantitative research to assess the uncertainty
involved in innovation, particularly in relation to estimating innovation capability at a firm, industrial,
or national level [22,23]. A similar discussion can be found in Costanza et al. [24] ”to say that we should
not do valuation of ecosystems is to deny the reality that we already do, always have and cannot avoid
doing so in the future”. The research by Costanza et al. [24] emphasized the importance of quantifying
ecosystem values for the support of policy decisions or influencing public opinions. This research
stressed the necessity for quantitative research in innovation uncertainty. This research was based on
an inverse perspective of the relationship between uncertainty and innovation capability. Furthermore,
it studied the vulnerability of CEIC and worked to build a system approach to assess the vulnerability
of CEIC [11,13,15–17,20,21,25–27]. This new approach aimed to manage and reduce the vulnerability
of CEIC and to support the sustainable improvement of CEIC.
In order to assess the vulnerability of CEIC, this research quantitatively analyzed the individual
vulnerabilities of the major influence factors of CEIC with the objective to manage and improve their
responsive abilities. In order to achieve this goal, this research constructed a framework of vulnerability
of CEIC, using two comprehensive methods of vulnerability assessment in socio-economic research.
The two methods were the entropy and set pair analysis method (E-SPA) and the principle cluster
analysis and SPA method (P-SPA). This research also implemented these methods in eight construction
enterprises to analyze their CEIC, and compared the respective results. The results demonstrated the
functions of the vulnerability framework in the uncertainty analysis of construction innovation. The
results are applicable to other industries too.
This research expands the field of innovation functions of a company to enhance its
competitiveness and sustainable development from an inverse perspective when managing innovation
risks. It identified new areas of economic growth with potential broad impact on multiple industries. At
an industrial level, the research may help governments, industrial associations, and other organizations
implement targeted incentives for innovation planning, to reduce uncertainty and risk, to respond
338
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
to an innovation-driven service economy, and to promote regional and national innovation. In the
long run, the research can help to enhance the positions of industries and facilitate national innovation
strategies for economic development and restructuring.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 focuses on the review of literature, links of
analysis levels, and the research agenda. Section 3 provides the research methods. Section 4 builds the
vulnerability framework based on the selected theories and methods and implements the research
procedure and measurements to analyze the vulnerability of CEIC. Section 5 presents the research
results, summarizes the conclusions, and highlights the implications of vulnerability assessment for
innovation capability in enterprises, and at industrial and national levels.
2. Literature Review
2.1. Innovation and Uncertainty
Enterprises are becoming more specialized than ever before. Based on the technological
know-how of a company, competition may lead to additional challenges with respect to innovation and
handling uncertainty. Adaptability paired with innovation therefore becomes a key factor to advance
technological diversity and the willingness to experiment with new products and services. According
to Bell and Pavitt [27], firms rarely fail because of an inability to master a new field of technology, but
because of the lack of adaptability and responsiveness to new industry demands and the inability to
proactively embrace and discover new technological opportunities [28].
Companies are vulnerable to external factors if they are not well prepared or not strategically
aligned with the new innovative technologies. Companies need to be willing to take risks in order
to succeed in the competitive construction industries. Finding the right approach to balancing risk
versus a company’s vulnerability and its innovative capability is key to success. Facing constant
competition in the advancement of any industry for new technology separates company strategies that
are sustainable from those that are not. Major differences in this approach seem to exist between larger
and smaller companies in the same industries since key challenges for the strategic management of
technology depend on a company’s size and its core business: small firms must focus on defining and
defending their product niche while large firms focus on building and exploiting competences based
on R&D or on complex production or information systems. Companies require continuous learning,
the capacity to integrate specialists, and a willingness both to break down established functional and
divisional boundaries and to take a view to the long term [29].
Among a multitude of research, Schumpeter’s concept of long waves, a theory of technical
innovation and structural change, shows that the successful diffusion of this technology depends
on a wide variety of institutional changes. Freeman et al. points to a number of policies including
flexible working hours, training and less restrictive macroeconomic demand policies which would
help to generate higher levels of innovation [30]. This concept could certainly be extended to the
sustainability of an innovation friendly company environment. Innovation does not lead to success
just by itself if it is not supported by progressive and flexible federal, regional, and company specific
policies. Otherwise, potential risk factors or the perception of uncertainty will hinder the advancement
and sustainability of a progressive innovative environment.
Nevertheless, innovation processes are often criticized because they do not accurately portray
the process of industry movement, in which there were uncertain and dynamic interactions among
knowledge, resources, and environments [31]. Therefore, striving to remove uncertainty might lead to
the risk of hindering or even completely impeding innovation rather than promoting it. Despite much
success in overcoming uncertainty, it has become clear that uncertainties can never be completely
removed. Instead, uncertainty keeps emerging in new forms accompanying complex scientific
processes, organization structures, and technical systems. Strategies should be prepared at different
levels of acceptance of uncertainty and be utilized to benefit social-economic developments [18].
Uncertainty is not a deficiency, but a structural feature embedded in any entrepreneurial entity.
339
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
Likewise, uncertainty is not strictly a shortcoming, rather an important factor that can lead to growth.
The endeavor to eliminate uncertainty holds the risk of jeopardizing rather than promoting innovation.
Dealing with uncertainty is a continuous process for construction innovation. The concept of
coping with uncertainty, as opposed to removing it through planning and control, was presented and
substantiated by Bohle [32]. This new cognitive approach to manage uncertainty in innovation
processes is not just wishful thinking. For example, Bohle [32] proposed approaches such as
experience-led and subject-based actions in project management. They provided new ways of
dealing with uncertainty in project management. However, these methods have barely been further
developed into quantitative instruments for systematic promotion of innovation processes [32].
This paper developed a new system with quantitative methods to manage the uncertainty in
construction innovation. Meanwhile, the system has the ability to react and overcome uncertainty with
countermeasures, instead of eliminating uncertainty which might weaken the power of innovation.
2.2. Vulnerability
As an emerging area, systematic studies of vulnerability began with research on natural disasters,
with the purpose to achieve sustainable development of the environment through reducing uncertainty,
sensitivity, and vulnerability [10]. At present, scholars widely use the methodologies of vulnerability
research to explore economic domains, such as financial vulnerability and household vulnerability [10,
21,33–35]. For example, Dominitz and Manski [17] first discussed the vulnerability of a country’s
economic system. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) [35] defined the concept of
economic vulnerability as the capability to suffer the damage due to the impact of unanticipated events
in the process of economic development. Vulnerability relates to the sensitivity to disturbance inside
and outside of a system and the lack of capability to respond to make necessary changes to the system’s
structure and functions. In addition, sensitivity and adaptability are key components of the evaluation
of the vulnerability of a system [14,16,21,33,34,36–39].
Vulnerability management includes the assessment of a system’s sensitivity and adaptability by
managing or restricting the potential hazards to realize the systematic promotion in the political, social,
economic, or environmental fields. In recent years, examples of systems for which vulnerability
assessments were performed include, but are not limited to, climate changes, natural disasters,
ecological crises, food security, and public health. The research methods used include composite
index method, fuzzy method, scenario analysis, and input-output method [14,16,21,25,33,34,36–39].
Such assessments were conducted on behalf of a range of different organizations, from small businesses
to large enterprises. For example, Gnangnon [25] endowed different weights to various economic
growth-indicators to calculate economic vulnerability indices in developing countries. Turner et al. [21]
proposed a framework of factors and linkages to study the potential effects of the vulnerability of
a couple of human–environment systems which was also related to the sensitivity and resilience of
the system.
However, innovation capability is an important driver of any economic system, and the assessment
of the vulnerability of innovation capability has not drawn enough attention, especially in regards
to CEIC. Therefore, it is urgent to study how to measure the level of vulnerability, select indices, and
manage index information to conduct a vulnerability assessment of CEIC. In this research, the authors
first selected indices of vulnerability by using the entropy method. The entropy method is a common
method to generate the objective weight of index system [40,41]. The next method used in this research
is Set Pair Analysis (SPA), which is a novel method to target the uncertainty in a system [42,43]. The
core thought of set pair analysis was to treat the confirmed uncertainty of the object to be studied as a
confirmed uncertainty system, and to analyze and study the connection and conversion of the research
objects for the similarities and differences. The core concept of set pair analysis was the set pair and the
connection degree [42]. Another comparison method of principle cluster analysis (PCA) was also used
to assess vulnerability. PCA assessment is usually used for the vulnerability assessment of tourism
340
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
economic systems or city economic systems [38,44–47]. Using Entropy SPA (E-SPA) and PCA-SPA
(P-SPA), the authors analyzed cases of large construction companies to reveal their vulnerability levels.
2.3. Construction Enterprise’s Innovation Capability (CEIC)
From a system point of view, construction innovation capabilities at firm, regional, and national
levels are three closely related categories, which support and influence each other, characterized by
general factors to realize the overall achievement of sustainable innovation. In innovation systems,
the national, regional or industrial technical changes and economic growth are the outcomes of
the innovation activities that take place among all firms. However, the changes are not simply the
summation of firm-level innovation capabilities, but the result of their interactions at national, regional
or industrial levels instead. At national or regional levels, innovation measurements are calculated by
agencies such as European Innovation Scoreboard [48], OECD STI Outlook [49], Nordic Innovation
Monitor [50], UNCTAD indicators [51] and World Bank indicators [52]. The measured innovation
efficiencies refer to innovation input and output, innovation activity, innovation environment, etc. with
relevant indicators.
CEIC can be used as an important carrier for national and regional innovation strategies. It is
usually implemented at a micro level to foster, form, and upgrade innovation capabilities [3,23,53–58],
such as innovation environments, innovation investment capabilities, cooperative innovation
capabilities, intellectual property capabilities, and change-innovation capabilities [1]. Innovation
capabilities enable construction enterprises to create, deploy, and maintain advantageous business
performance in the long run. The representations of innovation capabilities, such as distinct
skills, processes, procedures, organizational structures, decision rules, and disciplines, undergird
enterprise-level sensing, seizing, and reconfiguring capacities.
At the enterprise-level, there are three main types of studies that focused on construction
innovation capability. The first type of studies concentrated on analyzing and evaluating the major
changes in overall innovation capability and specified the current status and history of innovation
capability, e.g., international comparative study [59–61]. The second type of studies focused on the
evaluations of enterprise innovation capabilities in key sectors (or areas), a.k.a. primary businesses’
innovation. For example, equipment manufacturing, strategic approaches for emerging markets, and
process plant construction are considered as business innovation [1,2,4,62–65]. The third type focused
on evaluating and comparing the different types and sizes of CEIC [53,66–71], such as domestic
and foreign-funded enterprises, large, small-and-medium and micro enterprises, or state-owned and
private enterprises.
In terms of types of constitution, CEIC refers to industrial innovation, technological innovation,
system innovation, organizational innovation, and collaborative innovation [1,3,72,73]. The
participants of CEIC involve government, business, universities, individuals, and community groups.
The input factors of CEIC include capital investment, intellectual property, training, human resources
(HR), etc. Researchers noticed that CEIC contributed to the enhancement of national competitive
advantage, optimization of industrial resource allocation and the employment market, reduction of
energy dissipation and pollution, and improvement of social welfare [3]. The systematic framework of
CEIC gradually transited from individual and closed-end efforts into open-ended and multilateral
cooperative processes. The multilateral interactions help to form the cooperative effects to improve
the efficiency of labor, information, knowledge, technology, management and capital to implement
CEIC strategies [4,74,75]. Even though the above studies focused on product capability, technology
patents, knowledge transfer, university–industry–government cooperation, or output efficiency, there
is still deficiency in holistic understanding of the social and organizational aspects of innovations. For
example, as an important innovation resource, HR and the associated working conditions become
key enablers and central factors of innovations. So, instead of studying the individual parameters
of production, technology, and organization etc., this research studied CEICs systematically in a
framework. Additionally, the generic innovation models [71,76] put forward that the frameworks with
341
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
successful innovation outcomes were built by considering the focus of innovation, contextual factors,
organizational capabilities and innovation processes. The links between the key concepts used in this
research are shown in Figure 1. With the adoption of the extensions of generic innovation models, the
framework of CEIC included the following items:
Innovation
Ability
Vulnerability Sustainability
Construction industry practice
Risk
Uncertainty
Figure 1. Links between key concepts.
(A) An ideal environment for innovation capability. The environment of CEIC should be at a
high level of economic development, enterprise information management, and human resource access,
and with the support from government and social sectors to create an accessible and sustainable
environment [77,78].
(B) Adequate resources for innovation capability. Without an innovation resource pool, it is
difficult for CEIC to carry out innovation activities, such as management innovation, technology
innovation, and product innovation [79,80]. CEIC is the carrier of a national and regional innovation
strategy. The cooperation among university, industry, and society, together with the alliance of capital,
market demands and human resource (HR) pools for business innovation, are key to complying with
CEIC [81–84].
(C) Progressive innovation activities. CEIC is important to the foundation of the entire innovation
in an economic society. It also contributes to product innovation, process innovation, marketing
innovation and organizational innovation. Resources, technology, and knowledge (tangible and
intangible) are bundled, linked and incorporated for innovation activities, which then would be
converted and organized into routines and systems to formalize innovation capabilities and lead
to production competencies and performance [85,86]. In order to strengthen innovation activities,
construction enterprises should actively and continuously promote the innovation investments
in human and financial resources, pay good attention to integration and absorption of external
technologies, and sustain the creation and ownership of intellectual properties.
(D) Emerging innovation output. As a measurement of the CEIC levels, innovation output
includes the number of patents registered, technical trading expansion, and brand building promotion
efforts [2,66,87]. Innovation in the area of high-tech and knowledge-intensive service helps the
optimization of production and service structure at the industrial level; meanwhile, the new production
or service methods enable enterprises to further optimize the product structure. This reciprocal process
is an important aspect of innovation outputs [88–91].
(E) Improved economic efficiency. The economic efficiency of CEIC includes the efficiencies of
labor input, capital investment, and energy investment, which contribute to sustainable development
of business environments [92–95]. The construction enterprises with strong dynamic capabilities are
highly entrepreneurial, with innovation-capability uncertainty, and are highly vulnerable to innovation
environments. From a system uncertainty perspective, this uncertainty or dynamic feature is mainly
due to the sensitivity of CEIC to internal and external system disturbances. In addition, the lack of
responsiveness of CEIC hinders the sustainable development of those companies. The theoretical
framework in this research quantitatively evaluated the vulnerability of CEIC to improve innovation
342
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
capability. The analysis of the vulnerability or uncertainty of CEIC helps to promote the sustainability
of innovation capability.
2.4. Analysis Level and Framework
Items A to E in the aforementioned framework of CEIC can be summarized in the following
Table 1. Table 1 shows that there are three implications for CEIC. The implications are reflected in the
following aspects. (a) Innovation capability is inherently unstable. (b) Innovation capability is sensitive
to the interferences and changes from the outside world. (c) CEIC is vulnerable to risk. Thus, the
vulnerability of CEIC is a comprehensive system affected by sensitivity and adaptability. Sensitivity
is the degree of susceptibility to external shocks, or ability to deal with innovation uncertainty and
risk [77,83–86]. If a system has weak sensitivity, it would be less susceptible and demonstrate stronger
resistance than one with strong sensitivity. Adaptability is the ability to quickly adjust from a risky or
uncertain situation to a stable or sustainable situation. It also demonstrates the ability of a system to
maintain itself. Adaptability has a direct relationship with the innovation self-maintenance capability
of a system.
Table 1. Analysis level.
Topic Innovation and uncertainty Innovation capability Vulnerability
Literature
summary
Managing uncertainty is
absolutely necessary from the
perspective of construction
innovation. There will always be
something unforeseeable.
Flexibility and creativity are
important features of a
successful innovation strategy.
System dynamics and
uncertainty are likely
affected by product,
technology, organization,
and people. The current
influence factors and
measurement methods are
not industry specific.
Uncertainty threats are studied
using system sensitivity and
adaptability to analysis the
vulnerability in political, social,
economic fields.
Comprehensive methods or
mixed method such as E-SPA,
PCA, and SPA were used to
assess economic vulnerability.
Major
trends in
research
Systematical description or
linkage to deal with uncertainty
with quantitative methods to
promote innovation process.
Uncertainty measurement
of CEIC with generic
influence factors
Exploratory implementation of
the measurements and
verification of innovation
vulnerability.
Research
Focus
This research constructed the vulnerability-assessment framework, implemented the
corresponding indices, and verified CEIC using common comprehensive methods from economic
vulnerability areas.
In summary, the vulnerability indicator (X) of CEIC could be expressed in Equation (1).
X “ f pS, Aq (1)
Letter S represents sensitivity. Letter A represents adaptability. Large value of X indicates the tendency
towards exposure to risk and uncertainty. It also means that CEIC will be slowed down to return to a
sustainable state. Thus, the framework of Equation (1) is used to analyze vulnerability from two aspects,
namely system sensitivity and adaptability. This research extracted data from 2013 National Innovation
Index Reprot [96] to build the vulnerability indices in Table 2. In Table 2, the target layers include
Innovation Input Capability (IIC), Cooperative Innovation Capability of Enterprise (CICE), Intellectual
Property Capability (IPC), Change Innovation Capability (CIC), and Innovation Environment (IE).
Each target layer is further divided into sensitivity indices and adaptability indices. The explanations
of both sensitivity and adaptability indices in Table 2 include their indicators, measurement units,
descriptions, and tropisms. For sensitive and adaptive indicators, a positive tropism (+) indicates
a direct relationship between the index and the sensitivity or adaptability; a negative tropism (´)
indicates an inverse relationship between the index and the sensitivity or adaptability.
343
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
Table 2. Vulnerability-assessment framework and indices of construction enterprise’s innovation
capability (CEIC).
Target layer Sensitivity
(S) Indicators
Sensitive indicator
description and its
tropism
Adaptability
(A) Indicators
Adaptive indicator
description and its
tropism
Innovation
Input
Capability
(IIC)
IICS1
Innovative funding
accounted for the main
business revenue/%
It reflects the strength of
innovation funding (´) IICA1
R&D expenditure
accounts for the main
business revenue
It reflects R & D
expenditure
intensity (+)
IICS2
The proportion of R & D
types of HR employed/%
It reflects the intensity of
R & D personnel
investment (´)
IICA2
The proportion of PhD
graduates in HR of a
corporate
It reflects the
structure of highly
educated personnel
in an enterprise (+)
IICS3
The funding of R & D
specific sector accounted
for corporate R & D
expenditure/%
It reflects the state of the
R & D funding of a
specific sector (´)
IICA3
The personnel R & D
investment of a specific
sector accounted for that
of corporate R & D /%
It reflects the
manpower situation
of R & D institutions
(+)
Cooperative
Innovation
Capability of
Enterprise
(CICE)
CICES1
Cooperation Project
accounted for the whole
research project/%
It reflects the cooperative
scope of the enterprise (+) CICEA1
The R & D expenditure
proportion of universities
and research institutions
in whole corporate R&D
expenditures/%
It reflect R & D
cooperation with
universities and
research institutions
(+)
CICES2
The ratio of technology
import expenditure
accounted for the whole R
& D funding
It reflects the introduction
status of technology with
respect to independent
research (+)
CICEA2
The ratio of digestion and
absorption funds
accounted for technology
import funds
It reflects the
absorption and
re-innovation status
for the introduction
technology (´)
CICES3
The proportion of
cooperation innovative
project accounted for the
whole enterprise project/%
It reflects the innovation
state of the business
cooperation with external
institutions (´)
CICEA3
The proportion of
cooperation patent
accounted the total patent
application/%
It reflects the
cooperation scale of
technological
inventions (+)
Intellectual
Property
Capability
(IPC)
IPCS1
The percent of enterprise
invention patent
applications accounted for
the whole patent
applications/%
It reflects patent
application levels. (´) IPCA1
100,000 RMB R & D
funding per invention
patent
applications/(No./100,000
RMB)
It reflects the
patents output
efficiency (+)
IPCS2
The patent-owned project
accounted for the whole
enterprises’ projects/%
It reflects the patent
protection awareness of
enterprises (´)
IPCA2
10,000 patents-owned of
enterprise
employees/(piece
/10,000 employees)
It reflects the size of
enterprise patent
pool (+)
IPCS3
# of implementations of
invention patents
accounted for overall
implemented patents/%
It reflects the
transformation and
application status of
invention patents (´)
IPCA3
The ratio of patent
licensing and transfer
income accounted for
new product sales
revenue
It reflects the ratio of
patent assets income
and new product
sales revenue (+)
Change
Innovation
Capability
(CIC)
CICS1
New product marketing
expenses accounted for all
marketing costs/%
It reflects the marketing
strength of
new-investment products
(´)
CICA1
New product sales
revenue accounted for the
main business revenue/%
Reflects the impact
of business activities
on the entire
production of
innovative
activities(+)
CICS2
PCT applications accounted
for the whole patent
applications/%
It reflects the potential
technology inventions an
enterprise in the
international market (´)
CICA2
Income from patented
project accounted for the
entire project income of
an enterprise/%
It reflects the
corporate
innovation
competitiveness (+)
CICS3
Labor
productivity/(RMB/person)
It reflects the innovation
impact on labor
productivity (´)
CICA3
Comprehensive energy
output/%
It reflects social
performance of
corporate energy
consuming (´)
Innovation
Environment
(IE)
IEGS1
Direct government support
(GS)extent/%
The ratio of direct
government support
accounted for the whole
R & D expenses (+)
IEGS2
Indirect government
support(GS) extent/%
The ratio of indirect
government
support accounted
for the whole R & D
expenses (´)
IESS1
The extent of Social capital
to support (SS) R&D/%
The ratio of financial
institutions support R&D
accounted for the whole
R & D expenses (+)
IESS2
The extent Social capital
to support (SS) project
development/%
The ratio of
social-capital
development
projects accounted
for the total capital
of enterprises (´)
Note 1: Indices from 2013 National Innovation Index Report [96]; Note 2: For sensitive and adaptive indicators,
a positive tropism (+) indicates a direct relationship between the index and the sensitivity or adaptability;
a negative tropism (´) indicates an inverse relationship between the index and the sensitivity or adaptability.
The authors designed the research steps and framework as per Figure 2. This research used the
common mixed methods of E-SPA and P-SPA to analyze the vulnerability of CEIC. Particularly, Zhao’s
344
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
grade standards [97] were used as SPA method of the inventor to grade the vulnerabilities of selected
cases. In addition, the major influencing factors of response capability were ranked to manage the
vulnerability of CEIC.
Index
system
and
sample
data
Entropy weight
PCA weight
Set pair analysis Zhao’s grade method
Set pair analysis Zhao’s grade method
Innovation -
driven response
capability of
construction
enterprise
Data collection Vulnerability analysis and validation Response
Figure 2. Research steps and framework.
3. Research Method
3.1. Entropy and SPA (E-SPA) Method
3.1.1. Entropy Weight
Many generic evaluation models rely on subjective weighting methods to determine the weights
of indices in their evaluations. Entropy method [41] is an objective empowerment approach used to
reflect the disorder degree of information in information theories, which now has been expanded to
social and economic areas [40,41,47,98,99]. The weights of individual indicators are determined by
calculating the entropy and entropy weight of each of them. The greater the entropy is, the smaller
the corresponding entropy weight will be for any indicator. If an entropy weight is zero, the indicator
provides no useful information to decision-makers. That indicator may be removed in the evaluation
process. The amount of useful information that an indicator provides to a decision-maker is objective.
So, using the entropy method to determine index weights could provide realistic and objective insight
into the CEIC vulnerability system. The four main steps [41,44] taken are as follows.
Step 1: The formation of the evaluation matrix (Table S1).
Suppose there are m units and n indicators to be evaluated to establish the original data matrix in
Equation (2).
R “ prstq
mˆn
ps “ 1, 2, ..., m; t “ 1, 2, ..., nq (2)
where rst represents the actual value of the tth index of sth unit.
Step 2: The standardization of the evaluation matrix.
The following equation is used to normalize the matrix B,
B “ pbstq
mˆn
ps “ 1, 2, ..., m; t “ 1, 2, ..., nq with bst “ rst ´ rmin
rmax ´ rmin
(3)
where rmax and rmin represent the maximum and minimum values, respectively, for the evaluation unit.
If indicator is the positive tropism (+)
bst “ rst ´ rmin
rmax ´ rmin
(3a)
If indicator is the negative tropism (´)
bst “ rmax ´ rst
rmax ´ rmin
(3b)
Step 3: The calculation of the entropy
345
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
The entropy of the system can be defined by using the following calculations:
Ht “ ´
˜
mÿ
s“1
fstln fst
¸
{lnmps “ 1, 2, ..., m; t “ 1, 2, ..., nq (4)
where fst “ bst{
mř
s“1
bst; if fst “ 0, redefine the fst as
fst “ p1 ` bstq {
mÿ
s“1
p1`bstq (5)
Step 4: The calculation of the entropy weight
w “ pωtq
1ˆn , ωt “ p1 ´ Htq {
˜
n ´
ÿn
t“1
Ht
¸
with
ÿn
t“1
ωt “ 1 (6)
3.1.2. Set Pair Analysis (SPA)
Given two sets v and u, the set pair is expressed as H “ pv, uq. Equation (7) calculates the
connection degree of the two sets:
μ “ S
N
` F
N
i ` P
N
j “ a ` bi ` cj, where a ` b ` c “ 1 (7)
In Equation (7), N is the total number of characteristics of a set pair; S is the number of
characteristics of two sets; P is the number of opposite characteristics of two sets; F is the number of
characteristics of two sets, which are independent to each other. The ratio
S
N
is the similarity degree of
two sets;
F
N
is the difference degree of two sets;
P
N
is the opposite degree of two sets.
In summary, a in Equation (7) is the coefficient of similarity degree; c is the coefficient of opposite
degree. i and j are the coefficients of the difference and the opposite degrees. i takes the uncertain
value in the section [´1, 1] according to different situations; j takes the value of ´1 in general situations
to indicate that
P
N
is the opposite to the similarity degree
S
N
.
3.1.3. E-SPA Vulnerability Method
(1) The formation of vulnerability evaluation matrix of CEIC
Given that vulnerability system of CEIC is Q “ tE, G,W, Du, the m evaluation unit is E “
te1, e2 ¨ ¨ ¨ emu, the n indices of each unit is G “ tg1, g2 ¨ ¨ ¨ gnu, the index weight is W “ tw1,w2 ¨ ¨ ¨wnu
(see also Equation (6)), the index evaluation is dkp pk “ 1, 2, ¨ ¨ ¨ ,m; p “ 1, 2, ¨ ¨ ¨ , nq, then the evaluation
matrix D of vulnerability system of CEIC is shown in Equation (8).
D “
»
———–
d11 d12 ¨ ¨ ¨ d1n
d21 d22 ¨ ¨ ¨ d2n
¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨
dm1 dm2 ¨ ¨ ¨ dmn
fi
ffi ffi ffi fl
(8)
(2) Identification of similarity and opposite degree
Identify the maximum index setU “ tu1, u2, ¨ ¨ ¨ unu and the minimum index set V “ tv1, v2, ¨ ¨ ¨ vnu
in the evaluation unit to generate the similarity degree akp and opposite degree ckp of dkp in the
evaluation matrix D on basis of the set

vp, up
(
.
346
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
If dkp is a positive tropism (+),
$’’&
’’%
akp “
dkp
up ` vp
ckp “ upvp
dkp
`
up ` vp
˘
(9a)
If dkp is a negative tropism (´),
$’’&
’’%
akp “ upvp
dkp
`
up ` vp
˘
ckp “
dkp
up ` vp
(9b)
(3) The connection degree of vulnerability
The connection degree μ of set pairs tEk,Uu in rV,Us is shown in Equation (10).
$’&
’%
μpEk,Uq “ ak ` bki ` ckj
ak “ ř
ωpakp
ck “ ř
ωpckp
(10)
(4) The vulnerability indicator X of CEIC
Given xk represents the connection degree between evaluation unit Ek and the max index set
U “ tu1, u2, ¨ ¨ ¨ unu for the Kth construction enterprise, which is shown in Equation (10), the larger
xk is or the closer vulnerability to the max value, the more vulnerable and uncertain the CEIC, and
vice versa.
xk “ ak
ak ` ck
(11)
3.2. PCA and SPA (P-SPA) Method
The PCA Score process is shown in the following seven steps [100,101].
Step 1: Using SPSS 22 software to implement the factor analysis to extract the principal component
F1, F2, . . . , Fn.
Step 2: Calculating the loading of F1 score. Factor scores were generated and standardized
through loadings. The F1 loading was divided by the square root of the corresponding eigenvalues of
F1, to generate its orthogonal eigenvectors. N indicators were given as a1, a2, . . . , aN.
Step 3: Calculating F1 score (f1) with Equation (12). In Equation (12), x1, x2, ..., xN were the
standardized data of N items with the first sample.
f1 “ a1 ˆ x1 ` a2 ˆ x2 ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ ¨ aN ˆ xN (12)
Step 4: Repeating the steps to calculate F2, F3 and Fn scores ( f2, f3, ¨ ¨ ¨ , fN) in the first sample.
Step 5: According to the variance % (v1, v2, v3, ¨ ¨ ¨ vn%) and cumulative variance % (cv%) of Initial
eigenvalues, the weighted sum score Fs was calculated by Equation (13) in the first sample.
Fs “ pv1 f1 ` v2 f2 ` v3 f3 `¨ ¨ ¨`vn fnq {cv (13)
Step 6: Repeating the process on other samples. Then, N indicators were normalized score to
calculate the weight, and the weight set WP,
WP “ rwp1, wp2, ¨ ¨ ¨ , wpns (14)
347
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
Step 7: Constructing the P-SPA Vulnerability method. After using Equations (8) and (14) to
alternate the entropy weight, the authors followed the analogy steps of E-SPA method to analysis the
vulnerability of CEIC.
4. Empirical Analysis
4.1. Data Collection
In order to verify the vulnerability method of CEIC, comprehensive, accurate, and representative
data were retrieved from the “E01Civil Construction Industry Classification Guideline of the Chinese
Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC)”, which included a total of 51 public construction companies
(E01 and E05 Building Decoration Classification Guideline) in the Shanghai stock exchange and the
Shenzhen stock exchange, P.R. China in 2014. A set of these enterprises was identified and used
to test the vulnerability framework. Enterprises from the CSRC list are usually large-scale, global
competitors and ideal for CEIC analysis. The annual reports of the CSRC provide the enterprise specific
information. The authors carefully cleansed the data using the following criteria. (1) The company is
listed in the CSRC list for at least eight consecutive years; and (2) there must be an accurate business
description. After data cleansing, there were eight enterprises that fit the criteria and were used in the
model construction.
On average, researchers used between five and 25 companies with time durations of one to four
consecutive years for validation or verification in research projects [92–98]. Additional data were
collected from internal sources such as HR, intellectual property, government support, enterprise,
innovation investment, management reports, secretarial files, and electronic records. All of the
selected companies produced and maintained such information for their day-to-day managerial and
operational use. In other words, these data were secondary in nature and were readily available within
the business organizations.
The selected companies are listed in Table 3, and the corresponding data are listed in Table 4a,b.
The eight companies included in Table 3 are large construction enterprises. The following framework
does not contain any parameters that would be affected by the company size of a sample. In addition,
the assessment method and framework are applicable to small and medium enterprises (SMEs).
Table 3. Selected samples of the eight construction enterprises.
ID The Listed Time Domain Business Area Research Time Span The Code
A 2007 Construction of structural steel, Industrial construction 2007–2014 1
B 2001 Railway Engineering and other engineering
construction, real estate projects, sales 2007–2014 2
C 1994
Industrial construction, commercial construction, real
estate, food service, design and consulting, and facility
rental (since 2008)
2007–2014 3
D 2004 Road and bridge construction, asphalt concrete sales,
environmental protection business 2005–2014 4
E 1997
Project contracting, cement production and sales, civil
explosive, hydroelectric power construction,
management of expressways, real estate
2004–2014 5
F 2006 Construction, real estate development 2006–2014 6
G 2005
Installation of cement production lines, manufacturing
of machinery and equipment, design and technology
transfer, supervision
2007–2014 7
H 2005
Civil construction, Industrial construction, public
facilities construction, building decoration, sales of
building materials
2005–2014 8
348
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
Table 4. Sensitivity data of vulnerability of CEIC.
Innovation Input
capability
Cooperation Innovation
Capability
Intellectual Property
Capability
Innovation Change
Capability
Innovation
Environment
IICS1 IICS2 IICS3 CICES1 CICES2 CICES3 IPCS1 IPCS2 IPCS3 CICS1 CICS2 CICS3 IEGS1 IESS1
A 9.15% 30.8% 40.98% 0.9% 1.692 24.2% 12.37% 9.89% 40.0% 4.0% 12.95% 267879 21.57% 3.41%
B 8.78% 30.5% 37.29% 1.17% 1.12 24.4% 12.49% 10.59% 38.7% 5.8% 10.54% 254396 26.62% 4.05%
C 9.17% 28.9% 44.22% 0.97% 1.43 25.7% 11.92% 13.66% 42.9% 3.9% 12.62% 266902 19.89% 3.92%
D 7.98% 30.9% 39.89% 1.50% 0.99 22.8% 12.51% 10.79% 32.6% 3.3% 14.55% 267983 23.09% 2.97%
E 8.46% 27.3% 42.25% 1.32% 1.01 23.9% 13.05% 14.82% 45.5% 4.9% 13.21% 259987 20.99% 3.38%
F 9.22% 28.4% 43.77% 0.73% 1.73 23.1% 13.58% 13.37% 36.1% 3.1% 12.74% 269808 19.72% 3.02%
G 9.01% 29.1% 39.83% 0.68% 1.66 25.5% 11.47% 9.52% 39.9% 2.9% 13.09% 270002 21.03% 3.96%
H 8.69% 31.0% 40.17% 1.01% 1.59 24.9% 12.06% 12.22% 40.8% 3.7% 13.11% 268147 20.76% 3.55%
4.2. E-SPA Result
4.2.1. Entropy Weight of Indices
The authors constructed the evaluation matrix and matrix standardization with Equations (2)
and (3). They then used Equations (4)–(6) to deal with the standardization data in Tables 4 and 5. The
results of entropy weights of indices are shown in Table 6. The corresponding calculation process in
this research could be seen in the Supplementary Materials.
Table 5. Adaptability data of vulnerability of CEIC.
Innovation Input
capability
Cooperation Innovation
Capability
Intellectual Property
Capability
Innovation Change
Capability
Innovation
Environment
IICA1 IICA2 IICA3 CICEA1 CICEA2 CICEA3 IPCA1 IPCA2 IPCA3 CICA1 CICA2 CICA3 IEGS2 IESS2
A 9.15% 3.31% 11.35% 44.19% 0.139 21.84% 0.231 993 13.9% 52.99% 10% 27.0% 36.9% 6.8%
B 10.27% 1.49% 10.98% 42.97% 0.152 21.55% 0.301 899 15.3% 53.73% 9.77% 26.3% 40.3% 10.7%
C 8.96% 2.99% 11.77% 43.58% 0.144 24.31% 0.240 967 15.1% 52.92% 9.31% 27.9% 39.6% 8.9%
D 9.39% 4.01% 11.09% 45.76% 0.098 17.67% 0.229 952 14.7% 53.88% 10.34% 25.4% 43.3% 9.7%
E 7.29% 4.21% 12.03% 44.62% 0.101 18.23% 0.206 1007 13.6% 51.64% 9.69% 25.9% 39.8% 9.5%
F 8.98% 3.13% 10.84% 40.88% 0.127 19.71% 0.200 981 14.2% 53.01% 10.51% 27.3% 38.1% 8.4%
G 9.37% 3.47% 9.96% 41.47% 0.130 16.89% 0.236 1017 13.7% 52.68% 9.98% 28.5% 39.9% 10.6%
H 9.59% 3.00% 10.38% 43.51% 0.136 19.01% 0.219 977 15.0% 53.03% 10.01% 27.2% 40.4% 10.9%
4.2.2. Identification of Vulnerability
The author constructed the assessment matrix using Equation (8) with indices data to generate
the similarity and opposition degrees. In step 1, the authors identified the maximum data set U and
minimum data set V as shown in Table 7.
In step 2, the authors used the Equations (9a) and (9b) to generate the similarity akp and opposition
degree ckp in the dkp of Equation (8).
In step 3, the authors used Equation (10) to deal with index weight, the similarity akp, and
opposition degree ckp. The calculations generated the similarity a and opposition degree c of
vulnerability of enterprise innovation capability in Table 8. The authors used Equation (11), the
similarity a, and opposition degree c to calculate the vulnerability indicator X in Table 8.
In step 4, the authors used the analogy process to deal with sensitivity and adaptability data
respectively, the similarity a, opposition degree c, and vulnerability indicator X of enterprise’ sensitivity.
The data of adaptability of innovation capability were also generated as shown in Table 8.
349
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
Table 6. Entropy weight and PCA weight of indices.
Index IICS1 IICS2 IICS3 CICES1 CICES2 CICES3 IPCS1 IPCS2 IPCS3 CICS1 CICS2 CICS3 IEGS1 IESS1
Entropy Weig 0.0432038 0.049067048 0.035248156 0.03877084 0.053206164 0.040532366 0.028819682 0.038867465 0.029726585 0.030631336 0.024660397 0.047492491 0.039519158 0.04478313
PCA Weig 0.106823571 0.01461821 0.027886806 0.047262562 0.003170126 0.265283625 0.185939536 0.014947161 0.163610376 0.125805123 0.185006011 0.108780112 0.048122622 0.278513069
Index IICA1 IICA2 IICA3 CICEA1 CICEA2 CICEA3 IPCA1 IPCA2 IPCA3 CICA1 CICA2 CICA3 IEGS2 IESS2
Entropy Weig 0.02301168 0.025365134 0.032359383 0.033075712 0.041265951 0.037907817 0.033785378 0.026661727 0.048286338 0.026045051 0.028806943 0.033478911 0.024799668 0.04062169
PCA Weig 0.090782332 0.185267733 0.014451584 0.036046266 0.219449805 0.185363984 0.185020389 0.099616493 0.174176412 0.005760201 0.261574165 0.136289993 0.005362125 0.110553235
Table 7. The max data set U and min data set V.
V 0.0922 0.31 0.4422 0.0068 0.99 0.257 0.1358 0.1482 0.455 0.058 0.1455 270002 0.1972 0.0297
U 0.0798 0.273 0.3729 0.015 1.73 0.228 0.1147 0.0952 0.326 0.029 0.1054 254396 0.2662 0.0405
Sign. ´1 ´1 ´1 1 1 ´1 ´1 ´1 ´1 ´1 ´1 ´1 1 1
V 0.0729 0.0149 0.0996 0.4088 0.152 0.1689 0.2 899 0.136 0.5164 0.0931 0.285 0.433 0.109
U 0.1027 0.0421 0.1203 0.4576 0.098 0.2431 0.301 1017 0.153 0.5388 0.1051 0.254 0.369 0.068
Sign. 1 1 1 1 -1 1 1 1 1 1 1 ´1 ´1 ´1
350
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
Table 8. a, c and X of vulnerability framework of CEIC.
Sensitivity Adaptability Vulnerability
as cs Xs aa ca Xa av cv XV
A E-SPA 0.498155954 0.89206403 0.50453205 0.512365605 0.477439407 0.517642969 0.504628 0.4838469 0.5105117
P-SPA 0.491235713 0.492601156 0.499306062 0.45408915 0.556627269 0.449274536 0.471400152 0.526789897 0.47225491
B E-SPA 0.503231366 0.487123778 0.508132228 0.482450401 0.515158926 0.483606546 0.4937662 0.499893 0.4969171
P-SPA 0.459289356 0.541436498 0.458956221 0.595191645 0.39944844 0.598399013 0.531858619 0.465617555 0.533204334
C E-SPA 0.481693552 0.503798343 0.488784894 0.499736677 0.488092023 0.505894066 0.4899117 0.4966446 0.4965877
P-SPA 0.487313981 0.504576976 0.491297937 0.49295145 0.525135707 0.484193761 0.490324286 0.515554954 0.487458401
D E-SPA 0.503713135 0.491682509 0.506043138 0.512686689 0.481130567 0.51587622 0.5078003 0.4868764 0.510518
P-SPA 0.546644712 0.443842588 0.551894721 0.424835683 0.568083583 0.427865284 0.48160099 0.51018494 0.485589657
E E-SPA 0.471534032 0.520072564 0.475525308 0.503390354 0.492286234 0.505576168 0.4860437 0.5074167 0.4892431
P-SPA 0.441540415 0.547433388 0.446463207 0.372700497 0.615243849 0.377248474 0.404781199 0.5836429 0.409521783
F E-SPA 0.487024256 0.507239244 0.48983419 0.491055936 0.496107288 0.497441481 0.4888606 0.502169 0.4932856
P-SPA 0.544361307 0.451137158 0.546822849 0.409052674 0.601814228 0.404655324 0.47210905 0.531595876 0.470366378
G E-SPA 0.511031793 0.485367578 0.512878479 0.477164652 0.513768697 0.481530521 0.4956063 0.4983035 0.4986431
P-SPA 0.572003164 0.424703054 0.573893444 0.364723594 0.642851229 0.361981647 0.461319784 0.54119007 0.460164838
H E-SPA 0.493845236 0.491114037 0.501386452 0.480387508 0.508383974 0.485842803 0.4877156 0.49898 0.4942919
P-SPA 0.493941132 0.491211171 0.501385553 0.413605743 0.605142191 0.405994191 0.451043552 0.552048191 0.449653339
Note: (a) as,csand Xs refer to the similarity, opposition and vulnerability in the single sensitivity system of CEIC. (b) aa, ca and Xa refer to the similarity, opposition and vulnerability
in the single adaptability system of CEIC. (c) av,cvand XV refer to the similarity, opposition and vulnerability in the whole vulnerability system of CEIC.
351
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
According to Table 9, the comparison of Xv indicates that companies A and D had the most
vulnerability and company F had the least vulnerability of CEIC. At the same time, the ranking of
vulnerabilities of CEIC in the eight companies was E, F, H, C, B, G, A and D, in an ascending order. By
comparing the Xs of sensitivity, it was found that G, B, D are the three most sensitive companies. E
is the least sensitive. By comparing the Xa of adaptability, it was found that A, D and C are the three
most adaptable companies. E is the least adaptable.
Therefore, the less sensitive a company is, the better the vulnerability of their CEIC is managed.
The more sensitive and adaptable they are, the more likely it is that vulnerability of their CEIC is
increased. For the sustainable development of CEIC, it is a pertinent practical solution to manage and
reduce sensitivity and promote adaptability. Not only should attention be given to adaptability,
sensitivity is important to address in examining the linkage between innovation capability and
vulnerability factors.
4.3. P-SPA Result and Validation
Using Equation (14), the weights of indices of the PCA method were generated as shown in
Table 6. Further, the authors used the weight indices of PCA method to alternate the entropy weight in
Equation (8) in order to calculate the vulnerability of CEIC. The results are shown in Table 8.
Following the steps in Section 3.2, the authors extracted the six principal components from F1 to
F6 and their variances (%) in Table 9 to build Equation (15). The weighted sum scores of Fs are shown
in Equation (15).
Fs “ p0.30251 f1 `0.25894 f2 `0.18625 f3 `0.10871 f4 `0.07236 f5 `0.05256 f6q {0.98133 (15)
Table 9. Total variance explained of original questionnaire.
Component Initial Eigenvalues Extraction Sums of Squared Loadings
Total % of Variance Cumulative % Total % of Variance total %
1 8.470 30.251 30.251 8.470 30.251 30.251
2 7.250 25.894 56.145 7.250 25.894 56.145
3 5.215 18.625 74.770 5.215 18.625 74.770
4 3.044 10.871 85.641 3.044 10.871 85.641
5 2.026 7.236 92.877 2.026 7.236 92.877
6 1.472 5.256 98.133 1.472 5.256 98.133
7 0.523 1.867 100.000
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis.
Using PCA and SPA (P-SPA) methods, the authors found that company B had the greatest
vulnerability Xv and company E had the least vulnerability Xv of CEIC. At the same time, the
companies with the ascending vulnerability Xv of CEIC were E, H, G, F, A, D, C and B.
With the results of P-SPA method in Tables 7 and 8 through comparing the Xs and Xa of sensitivity
and adaptability, the authors found that companies E and F both had lower vulnerability Xv, lower
sensitivity, and higher adaptability correspondingly. The calculation results of P-SPA validate the
vulnerability system discussed in Section 4.2. While companies A and D both had higher vulnerability
Xv, the higher sensitivity Xs and lower adaptability Xa correspondingly. The findings help to develop
CEIC by promoting adaptability and managing sensitivity simultaneously.
4.4. Vulnerability Grade
The authors used Zhao’s grade standard [97] to calculate indicators for the SPA method. The
calculation of the SPA classic grade method is shown in the following three evaluation conditions.
If maxra, b, cs “ b, it is grade 2; If maxra, b, cs “ a, and a ` b ě 0.7, it is grade 1, otherwise it is
grade 2; If maxra, b, cs “ c, and b ` c ě 0.7, it is grade 3, otherwise it is grade 2.
352
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
Grade 1 indicates that the vulnerability of innovation capability is high. A company needs to
reduce risk in the system and manage its CEIC. Grade 2 indicates that the vulnerability is satisfactory.
A company needs to be more active in managing the uncertainty of its innovation capability. Grade 3
indicates that the vulnerability is low. It is recommended to continue current operations to maintain
innovation capability.
The calculations of the vulnerability grades of both the E-SPA and P-SPA methods are based
on Equation (7) and Table 8, with further comparison shown in Table 10. The samples are at level
2 from the calculations of both the E-SPA method and P-SPA method. These companies were in a
good position to manage risk or uncertainty of innovation capability. The results show that the P-SPA
method effectively validates the E-SPA method to assess the vulnerability and its grade of CEIC.
Table 10. The vulnerability grade of innovation capability.
Code A B C D E F G H
E-SPA method 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
P-SPA validation 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
4.5. Response with Major Influencing Factors
The vulnerability Xv of CEIC comes from the combined effects of sensitivity and adaptability.
The authors constructed a vulnerability matrix of CEIC using the horizontal axis with low and
high sensitivity and the vertical axis with low and high adaptability. The high sensitivity and low
adaptability interval is an ideal area for CEIC. It shows an effective path to improve the adaptability
and management or to reduce sensitivity. With low sensitivity and high adaptability, it helps to reduce
the vulnerability of CEIC. Thus, an innovation strategy might look for the major influencing factors
and compose a targeted solution to improve the adaptability of CEIC to maintain this sustainable path.
This research used the major impact index formula [14,20,102] to generate and compare the impact
extent of the adaptable indices, which are shown in Equation (16) and Table 11.
Ai “ ωidi{
ÿn
i“1
ωidi ˆ100% (16)
Ai represents the impact extents of indices. ωi represents the entropy weight of an index. di represents
the standardization value of an index. n represents the index number in the adaptability system of
CEIC. This research used Ai ě 5% [14,20,102] to evaluate the extent of impacts of indices and compared
their frequencies. The indices were then placed in descending order of their frequencies. The top
frequencies were the major influencing factors of the adaptability system in the vulnerability of CEIC.
Table 11. Major influence factors in the adaptability system.
IICA1 IICA2 IICA3 CICEA1 CICEA2 CICEA3 IPCA1 IPCA2 IPCA3 CICA1 CICA2 CICA3 IEGS2 IESS2
A 5.4254 6.4111 8.208 8.4744 3.7526 9.5526 3.9171 8.0228 3.2187 5.9293 6.2568 6.1192 9.3678 15.344
B 9.9312 0 6.8815 6.1135 0 10.274 14.580 0 20.8391 10.487 4.7657 10.253 5.017 0.8552
C 5.2773 5.7243 11.578 7.4888 2.5018 15.512 5.4755 6.2874 17.435 6.0904 0 2.6517 5.8671 8.1089
D 5.6946 8.2524 6.2032 11.615 14.491 1.3994 3.4066 4.2053 10.971 9.1461 8.6829 11.756 0 4.1751
E 0 11.532 14.713 11.525 17.720 3.1127 0.9126 11.095 0 0 4.1477 12.766 6.1665 6.3067
F 6.104 7.1534 6.4344 0 8.9359 6.7386 0 8.666 7.9712 7.4507 13.474 6.0616 9.4247 11.585
G 11.374 13.076 0 2.832 11.906 0 8.5283 18.881 2.0115 8.5637 11.390 0 9.3303 2.105
H 8.8239 6.996 3.262 8.8562 6.0746 5.381 3.1576 8.7559 19.756 8.0296 8.3486 6.9752 5.583 0
Freq. 7 7 6 6 5 5 3 6 5 7 5 6 7 4
Freq.% 0.875 0.875 0.75 0.75 0.625 0.625 0.375 0.75 0.625 0.875 0.625 0.75 0.875 0.5
The largest frequency (0.875%) indices in the adaptability system of CEIC were IICA1, IICA2,
CICA1 and IEGS2. Table 11 also shows that the major influencing factors (0.875%) for CEIC mainly focus
on (a) investment, especially R&D expenditure and the proportion of highly educated employees [103];
(b) innovation and change, especially the impact of new service or innovation activities on the
353
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
market [78]; (c) government support, for example, large program support and taxation exemptions for
application of certain innovation technologies [3,56,60,104–106].
The second-tier factors (0.75%) are IICA3, CICEA1, IPCA2 and CICA3. They emphasize the key
roles of HR investment and innovation in change, referring to the amount of HR of R&D institutions
and the management of corporate energy consumption. In addition, cooperative innovation of
enterprise and IP capability played major roles in sustainable CEIC, such as the enterprise investment
in university–industry cooperative innovation and the size of enterprise patent pools [69,84,107].
However, much attention should be given to output performance of IP capability (IPCA1, 0.375%)
to promote IP marketing and to solve IP transformation problems [108,109]. The lack of social
capital [3,110] support given to corporate total capital (IESS2, 0.5%) also leads to inadequate investment
in CEIC.
4.6. Discussion
As discussed in this paper, CEIC is vulnerable, and this vulnerability can be measured. The
researchers applied and confirmed a quantitative system approach to address the vulnerability of an
enterprise’s innovation efforts. Vulnerability research, as a new paradigm of sustainable development,
uncertainty and risk, sheds light on how to best analyze the uncertainty of innovation capability.
As an innovative method, SPA focuses on uncertainty and is widely applied in the economic and
social fields [11,12,18,26,111–114], and is combined with some common comprehensive methods,
such as E-SPA and P-SPA [44,100–102]. Innovation capability is an important driver of economic
development and is closely linked to uncertainty and risk. However, within the new paradigm of
reducing uncertainty, very little research exists to develop a systematic approach to assessing the
vulnerability of innovation capability [22,23].
In order to extend a generic model of construction innovation [71,76], this new vulnerability
framework of CEIC focuses on the extent of innovation investment, IP capability, cooperative
innovation, change innovation and the overall environment to foster companies’ innovation. Further,
this research used the corresponding index in the 2013 National Innovation Survey System of MOST,
China to match and test the proposed framework (see also Section 2.4) of the vulnerability system of
CEIC, which contained two subsystems referred to as the sensitivity and adaptability of a systematic
approach and includes the above five criteria and 28 indicators.
Meanwhile, this paper applied the E-SPA as the main method to analyze the case data to
evaluate levels of vulnerability, comparing the results of P-SPA to confirm the empirical results.
The authors used the E-SPA and P-SPA measurements regarding the vulnerability and uncertainty
of innovation capability and quantitatively bridged the gap in system assessments of vulnerability
of CEIC. More importantly, this research justified the necessity for a new approach to examining
construction innovation uncertainty and built a foundation for overcoming construction innovation
uncertainty, with a view to provide a basis for further research on this topic.
For two subsystems of CEIC, sensitivity referred to the ability of the system to withstand external
or internal interferences or pressures. The less the sensitivity, the greater a system’s resilience, and vice
versa. Adaptability refers to the ability to respond to change which embodies an uncertain state or
crisis situations. In other words, the greater the adaptability of a company, the stronger will be the
ability of a company to respond to those challenges, and vice versa.
In this research, case studies showed that the sustainable CEIC needed to increase the innovation
investment capability such as to enhance HR funding for highly skilled or talented individuals and
R&D expenditure for individuals that show the greatest potential for innovation. Much attention
seems to be given to the collaboration innovation between universities and research institutions,
with the objective to impact business and marketing strategies that already demonstrate a high level
performance of intellectual property, which could increase social recognition and capital support, in
order to obtain more government assistance [104,115–118]. Thus, at the policy planning or strategic
levels, positive industrial and corporate environments may lead to an optimization of an enterprise’s
354
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
innovation efforts and may attract sustainable government support. Furthermore, well established
policy and strategic planning may encourage investment in corporate innovation. Topics for further
research may include how to implement a practical strategy and operation of a market-oriented
university–industry cooperative innovation approach, and how to strengthen and improve the
innovation performance of intellectual property capabilities.
5. Conclusions
This study discussed the vulnerability framework of CEIC, and attempts to quantify an evaluation
system for CEIC. It opened doors to future research in the theory and application areas in this field. This
study proposed a new systematic approach to supplement the quantitative framework and methods in
examining the uncertainty regarding a company’s ability to innovate applied to the case of construction
enterprises. Uncertainty regarding CEIC should not simply be ignored. Rather, it should be managed
intelligently and, in an ideal world, help to develop an environment conducive to ongoing innovation.
Vulnerability, and the management thereof, is a new domain in the large field of socioeconomic research.
This research built a vulnerability framework for CEIC, which examines the subsystems of sensitivity
and adaptability and a number of factors including innovation investment capability, cooperation
innovation capability, intellectual property capability, change innovation capability, and innovation
environment. Further, this research assessed the vulnerability of CEIC, using the comparative results
of E-SPA and P-SPA methods for confirmation. It analyzed the major influencing factors in promoting
sustainable CEIC.
Case studies showed that the two comparative methods confirm the same grade level of
vulnerability of CEIC. We identified a stronger practical approach to reduce the vulnerability
of CEIC by managing or reducing sensitivity and strengthening adaptability to respond to
new economic environments. The major influencing factors of CEIC are focused on (a) the
highly educated HR innovation team, (b) R&D investment intensity, (c) substantial market-led
corporate–university–industry cooperation on intellectual property performance, (d) government
support and social capital support, and (e) change innovation in construction energy consumption.
In summary, this research provided a theoretical framework and an application method to assess
and evaluate both the vulnerability and uncertainty involved in innovation. This research can be
implemented to evaluate and grade the vulnerability of CEIC at national, industrial or enterprise
levels with the corresponding sequential data and indices. A limitation of this research may result
due to the sequential data boundary, i.e., at industrial or national levels, in conducting a systematic
analysis to conceptualize innovation capability. A possible future research project may be to expand
the dynamic data collection to analyze the vulnerability of construction innovation at both the macro
and industrial levels.
Supplementary Materials: Supplementary Materials: Supplementary can be found at
www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/8/1/17/s1.
Acknowledgments: Acknowledgments: This research is supported by the National Nature Science Foundation
of China (NO.71301013), Humanity and Social Science Program Foundation of Ministry of Education of China
(NO.13YJA790150), China ASC Fund (NO. asc-kt2014022 and asc-kt2014023), China scholarship council, Shaanxi
Nature Science Fund (NO.2014JM2-7140), Shaanxi Social Science Fund (NO.2014HQ10, NO. 2015Z071 and
NO. 2015Z075), Xi'an Science Technology Burea Fund(NO.CXY1512(2)), and Special Fund for Basic Scientific
Research of Central College (Humanities and Social Sciences), Chang’an University (NO.0009-2014 G 6285048 and
NO. 310828155031).
Author Contributions: Author Contributions: Prof. Zhang and Prof. Li analyzed the data and contributed to
drafting the paper. Prof. Zhang and Prof. Li contributed to the concept and design of the paper. Prof. Xie and
Prof. Schmidt contributed useful advice and modified the paper. Prof. Zhang is in charge of the final version of
the paper.
Conflicts of Interest: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
355
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
CEIC: Construction enterprises’ innovation capabilities
E-SPA: The entropy and set pair analysis method
P-SPA: The principle cluster analysis and SPA method
R&D: Research and development
UNCTAD: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
UNDP: United Nations Development Programme
OECD: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
OECD STI: OECD Science, Technology and Innovation
MOST, China: Ministry of Science and Technology of the People´s Republic of China
References
1. Akintoye, A.; Goulding, J.; Zawdie, G. Construction Innovation and Process Improvement; Wiley-Blackwell:
Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2012.
2. Brochner, J. Construction contractors as service innovators. Build. Res. Inf. 2010, 38, 235–246. [CrossRef]
3. Castro-Lacouture, D.; Irizarry, J.; Ashuri, B.; American Society of Civil Engineers; Construction Institute.
Construction research congress 2014 construction in a global network. In Proceedings of the 2014
Construction Research Congress, Atlanta, GA, USA, 19–21 May 2014; American Society of Civil Engineers:
Reston, VA, USA, 2014.
4. Forbes, L.H.; Ahmed, S.M.; Ebooks Corporation. Modern construction lean project delivery and integrated
practices. In Industrial Innovation Series; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2011.
5. Goh, B.; Tjoa, A.; Xu, L.; Chaudhry, S. Intelligent enterprises for construction: Bridging the technology and
knowledge gaps through innovation and education. Res. Pract. Issues Enterp. Inf. Syst. 2006, 205, 119–131.
6. Blayse, A.M.; Manley, K. Key influences on construction innovation. Constr. Innov. 2004, 4, 143–154.
[CrossRef]
7. Suprun, E.V.; Stewart, R.A. Construction innovation diffusion in the Russian Federation. Constr. Innov. 2015,
3, 278–312. [CrossRef]
8. Kulatunga, U.; Amaratunga, R.; Haigh, R. Construction Innovation: A Literature Review on Current
Research. 2006. Available online: http://usir.salford.ac.uk/9886/1/205_Kulatunga_KJ_et_al_
CONSTRUCTION_INNOVATION_A_LITERATURE_REVIEW_ON_CURRENT_RESEARCH_2006.pdf
(accessed on 21 December 2015).
9. Hultgren, A.; Tantawi, A. Front-End Idea Screening of Potential Radical Innovation in Large Firms: A Holistic
Framework for the Volvo Group; Chalmers University of Technology: Göteborg, Sweden, 2014.
10. Baker, S.M. Vulnerability and resilience in natural disasters: A marketing and public policy perspective.
J. Public Policy Mark. 2009, 28, 114–123. [CrossRef]
11. Le Breton-Miller, I.; Miller, D. The paradox of resource vulnerability: Considerations for organizational
curatorship. Strat. Manag. J. 2015, 36, 397–415. [CrossRef]
12. Dabla-Norris, E.; Gündüz, B.Y. Exogenous shocks and growth crises in low-income countries: A vulnerability
index. World Dev. 2014, 59, 360–378. [CrossRef]
13. Dass, M.; Kumar, P.; Peev, P.P. Brand vulnerability to product assortments and prices. J. Mark. Manag. 2013,
29, 735–754. [CrossRef]
14. Li, F.; Wan, N.Q.; Shi, B.L.; Liu, X.M.; Guo, Z.J. The vulnerability measure of tourism industry based on
the perspective of “environment-structure” integration a case study of 31 provinces in mainland China.
Geogr. Res. 2014, 33, 569–581.
15. Herceg, I.; Nesti, D. A new cluster-based financial vulnerability indicator and its application to household
stress testing in Croatia. Emerg. Markets Finance Trade 2014, 50, 60–77.
16. Holand, I.S.; Lujala, P.; Rød, J.K. Social vulnerability assessment for Norway: A quantitative approach. Nor. J.
Geogr. 2011, 65, 1–17. [CrossRef]
17. Rodríguez-Núñez, E.; García-Palomares, J.C. Measuring the vulnerability of public transport networks.
J. Transp. Geogr. 2014, 35, 50–63. [CrossRef]
356
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
18. Rossignol, N.; Delvenne, P.; Turcanu, C. Rethinking vulnerability analysis and governance with emphasis on
a participatory approach. Risk Anal. Int. J. 2015, 35, 129–141. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Springer, N.P.; Garbach, K.; Guillozet, K.; Haden, V.R.; Hedao, P.; Hollander, A.D.; Huber, P.R.; Ingersoll, C.;
Langner, M.; Lipari, G.; et al. Sustainable sourcing of global agricultural raw materials: Assessing gaps in
key impact and vulnerability issues and indicators. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, 1–22. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Hong, T.; Jian, Z. Regional vulnerability evaluation index system of environmental emergencies in
petrochemical industry. Adv. Mater. Res. 2014, 1073–1076, 400–404.
21. Turner, B.L.; Kasperson, R.E.; Matson, P.A.; McCarthy, J.J.; Corell, R.W.; Christensen, L.; Eckley, N.;
Kasperson, J.X.; Luers, A.; Martello, M.L.; et al. A framework for vulnerability analysis in sustainability
science. PNAS 2003, 100, 8074–8079. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Dassen-Housen, P. Management of uncertainty—A contradiction in itself? In Enabling Innovation:
Innovative Capability—German and International Views; Jeschke, S., Isenhardt, I., Hees, F., Trantow, S., Eds.;
Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Germany, 2011; pp. 30–33.
23. Trantow, S.; Hees, F.; Jeschke, S. Innovative capability. In Enabling Innovation: Innovative Capability —German
and International Views; Jeschke, S., Isenhardt, I., Hees, F., Trantow, S., Eds.; Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Germany,
2011; pp. 1–13.
24. Costanza, R.; d’Arge, R.; Groot, R.D.; Farber, S.; Grasso, M.; Hannon, B.; Limburg, K.; Naeem, S.; O’Neill, R.V.;
Paruelo, J.; et al. The value of ecosystem services: putting the issues in perspective. Ecol. Econ. 1998, 25,
67–72. [CrossRef]
25. Gnangnon, S.K. Does structural economic vulnerability matter for public indebtedness in developing
countries? J. Econ. Stud. 2014, 41, 644–671. [CrossRef]
26. Pérez Agúndez, J.A.; Yimam, E.; Raux, P.; Rey-Valette, H.; Girard, S. Modeling economic vulnerability: As
applied to microbiological contamination on the Thau Lagoon shellfish farming industry. Mar. Policy 2014,
46, 143–151. [CrossRef]
27. Ransbotham, S.; Mitra, S.; Ramsey, J. Are markets for vulnerabilities effective? MIS Q. 2012, 36, 43–64.
28. Bell, M.; Pavitt, K. Technological accumulation and industrial growth: Contrasts between developed and
developing countries. Ind. Corp. Change 1993, 2, 157. [CrossRef]
29. Pavitt, K. What we know about the strategic management of technology. Calif. Manag. Rev. 1990, 32, 17–26.
[CrossRef]
30. Freeman, C. The 'national system of innovation' in historical perspective. Camb. J. Econ. 1995, 19, 5–24.
31. OECD. Proposed Guidelines for Collecting and Interpreting Technological Innovation Data: Oslo Manual; OECD
Publication Services: Paris, France, 1997.
32. Böhle, F. Management of uncertainty–A blind spot in the promotion of innovations. In Enabling
Innovation–German and International Views, 1st ed.; Al, S.J.E., Ed.; Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Germany, 2011;
pp. 17–29.
33. Dominitz, J.; Manski, C.F. Perceptions of Economic Vulnerability: First Evidence from the Survey of Economic
Expectations/Jeff Dominitz and Charles f. Manski; Institute for Research on Poverty, University of
Wisconsin-Madison: Madison, WI, USA, 1995.
34. Berry, P.M.; Rounsevell, M.D.A.; Harrison, P.A.; Audsley, E. Assessing the vulnerability of agricultural land
use and species to climate change and the role of policy in facilitating adaptation. Environ. Sci. Policy 2006, 9,
189–204. [CrossRef]
35. UNDP. Human Development Report 1999; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 1999.
36. Erol, O.; Sauser, B.; Mansouri, M. A framework for investigation into extended enterprise resilience. Enterp.
Inf. Syst. 2010, 4, 111–136. [CrossRef]
37. Prewitt, K. The federal statistical system: Its vulnerability matters more than you think—Section four:
Strengthening the statistical system: Future of innovation in the federal statistical system. 2010. Available
online: https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/the-federal-statistical-system-its-vulnerability-mattersmore-
than-you-think/book235999 (accessed on 22 December 2015).
38. Han, R.; Tong, L.; Tong,W.; Yu, J. Research on vulnerability assessment of human-land system of Anshan
city based on set pair analysis. Progr. Geogr. 2012, 31, 344–351.
39. Reed, M.S.; Podesta, G.; Fazey, I.; Geeson, N.; Hessel, R.; Hubacek, K.; Letson, D.; Nainggolan, D.; Prell, C.;
Rickenbach, M.G.; et al. Surveys: Combining analytical frameworks to assess livelihood vulnerability to
climate change and analyse adaptation options. Ecol. Econ. 2013, 94, 66–77. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
357
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
40. Aldana-Bobadilla, E.; Kuri-Morales, A. A clustering method based on the maximum entropy principle.
Entropy 2015, 17, 151–180. [CrossRef]
41. Benedetto, F.; Giunta, G.; Mastroeni, L. A maximum entropy method to assess the predictability of financial
and commodity prices. Dig. Signal Process. 2015, 46, 19–31. [CrossRef]
42. Zou, Q.; Zhou, J.Z.; Zhou, C.; Song, L.X.; Guo, J. Comprehensive flood risk assessment based on set pair
analysis-variable fuzzy sets model and fuzzy AHP. Stochast. Environ. Res. Risk Assess. 2013, 27, 525–546.
[CrossRef]
43. Xia, C.; Yi, M.;Wei,W.; Yu, Z. Discussion of annual runoff dry-wet classification based on set pair analysis.
Yangze River 2015, 46, 21–24.
44. Su, M.R.; Yang, Z.F.; Chen, B. Set pair analysis for urban ecosystem health assessment based on
emergy-vitality index. China Environ. Sci. 2009, 29, 892–896.
45. Meng, X.M.; Hu, H.P. Application of set pair analysis model based on entropy weight to comprehensive
evaluation of water quality. J. Hydraul. Eng. 2009, 40, 257–262.
46. Sun, B.; Wang, H. Inventory Evaluation Model and Application of Shipbuilding Enterprise Based on the
Method of Optimal Combination. Int. J. U- E-Serv. Sci. Technol. 2015, 8, 175–184. [CrossRef]
47. Li, B.; Yang, Z.; Su, F. Measurement of vulnerability in human-sea economic system based on set pair analysis:
A case study of Dalian city. Geogr. Res. 2015, 34, 967–976.
48. Gobble, M.M. The 2009 European innovation scoreboard: EU lags us & Japan while China closing gap with
EU. Res. Technol. Manag. 2010, 53, 2–4.
49. OECD. OECD Science, Technology and Industry Outlook 2014. Available online:
http://dx.doi.org.libproxy.lib.ilstu.edu/10.1787/sti_outlook-2014-en (accessed on 21 December 2015).
50. Gupta, P.; Trusko, B.E. The Innovation Radar and enterprise Business System: Innovation in Five Nordic Countries
and Beyond; McGraw-Hill Professional: New York, NY, USA, 2014.
51. UNCTAD. UNCTAD at 50: A short History. 2014. Available online: http://unctad.org/en/
PublicationsLibrary/osg2014d1_en.pdf (accessed on 23 December 2015).
52. Bank,W. World Development Indicators 2010; World Bank: Washington, DC, USA, 2010; p. xxiii.
53. Azubuike, V.M.U. Technological innovation capability and firm's performance in new product development.
Commun. IIMA 2013, 13, 43–55.
54. Carcary, M.; Doherty, E.; Thornley, C. Business innovation and differentiation: Maturing the IT capability. IT
Prof. 2015, 17, 46–53. [CrossRef]
55. Daqi, X.U. Research on improving the technological innovation capability of SMEs by university-industry
collaboration. J. Eng. Sci. Technol. Rev. 2013, 6, 100–104.
56. Fagerberg, J.; Feldmany, M.P.; Srholec, M. Technological dynamics and social capability: US states and
European Nations. J. Econ. Geogr. 2014, 14, 313–337. [CrossRef]
57. Hansen, U.E.; Ockwell, D. Learning and technological capability building in emerging economies: The case
of the biomass power equipment industry in Malaysia. Technovation 2014, 34, 617–630. [CrossRef]
58. Tseng, C.-Y. Technological innovation capability, knowledge sourcing and collaborative innovation in Gulf
Cooperation Council countries. Innov. Manag. Policy Pract. 2014, 16, 212–223.
59. Raymond, L.; St-Pierre, J.; Uwizeyemungu, S.; Dinh, T. Internationalization capabilities of SMEs: A
comparative study of the manufacturing and industrial service sectors. J. Int. Entrep. 2014, 12, 230–253.
[CrossRef]
60. Manseau, A.; Seaden, G. Innovation in Construction: An International Review of Public Policies; Spon Press:
London, UK; New York, NY, USA, 2001.
61. Brooker, P.; Wilkinson, S. Mediation in the Construction Industry: An International Review; Routledge: London,
UK, 2010.
62. Altenburger, R. Green product innovation: Values and networks in open innovation processes. In
Proceedings of ISPIM Conferences, Dublin, Ireland, 8–11 June 2014.
63. Bindroo, V.; Mariadoss, B.J.; Pillai, R.G. Customer clusters as sources of innovation-based competitive
advantage. J. Int. Mark. 2012, 20, 17–33. [CrossRef]
64. Chan, I.; Liu, A.; Fellows, R. Role of leadership in fostering an innovation climate in construction firms.
J. Manag. Eng. 2014. [CrossRef]
65. Elmualim, A.; Gilder, J. Bim: Innovation in design management, influence and challenges of implementation.
Archit. Eng. Design Manag. 2014, 10, 183–199. [CrossRef]
358
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
66. Blindenbach-Driessen, F.; van den Ende, J. Innovation in project-based firms: The context dependency of
success factors. Res. Policy 2006, 35, 545–561. [CrossRef]
67. Chen, L.; Marsden, J.R.; Zhang, Z. Theory and analysis of company-sponsored value co-creation. J. Manag.
Inf. Syst. 2012, 29, 141–172. [CrossRef]
68. Gann, D.; Salter, A. Innovation in project-based, service-enhanced firms: The construction of complex
products and systems. Res. Policy 2000, 29, 955–972. [CrossRef]
69. Iammarino, S.; Piva, M.; Vivarelli, M.; von Tunzelmann, N. Technological capabilities and patterns of
innovative cooperation of firms in the UK regions. Reg. Stud. 2012, 46, 1283–1301. [CrossRef]
70. Leiringer, R.; Schweber, L. Managing multiple markets: Big firms and PFI. Build. Res. Inf. 2010, 38, 131–143.
[CrossRef]
71. Sexton, M.; Barrett, P. Appropriate innovation in small construction firms. Constr. Manag. Econ. 2003, 21,
623–633. [CrossRef]
72. Kuo, Y. Technology readiness as moderator for construction company performance. Ind. Manag. Data Syst.
2013, 113, 558–572. [CrossRef]
73. Ruwanpura, J.; Mohamed, Y.; Lee, S. Construction research congress 2010: Innovation for reshaping
construction practice. In Proceedings of the 2010 Construction Research Congress, Banff, AL, Canada,
8–10 May 2010.
74. Pellicer, E.; Correa, C.L.; Yepes, V.; Alarcón, L.F. Organizational improvement through standardization of the
innovation process in construction firms. Eng. Manag. J. 2012, 24, 40–53. [CrossRef]
75. Pryke, S.; Ebooks Corporation. Construction supply chain management concepts and case studies. In
Innovation in the Built Environment; Wiley-Blackwell: Chichester, UK; Malden, MA, USA, 2009.
76. Barrett, P.; Sexton, M.; Lee, A. Innovation in small Construction Firms; Taylor & Francis: London, UK; New York,
NY, USA, 2008; p. 107.
77. Patanakul, P.; Pinto, J.K. Examining the roles of government policy on innovation. High Technol. Manag. Res.
2014, 25, 97–107. [CrossRef]
78. Chesbrough, H.W.; Appleyard, M.M. Open innovation and strategy. Calif. Manag. Rev. 2007, 50, 57–76.
[CrossRef]
79. Wu, I.-L.; Chiu, M.-L. Organizational applications of it innovation and firm's competitive performance:
A resource-based view and the innovation diffusion approach. J. Eng. Technol. Manag. 2015, 35, 25–44.
[CrossRef]
80. Kamasak, R. Determinants of innovation performance: A resource-based study. Procedia-Soc. Behav. Sci.
2015, 195, 1330–1337. [CrossRef]
81. Han, J.-W.; Lim, H.-S. Strategic analysis and success factors of the enterprises through the convergence. Int. J.
Appl. Eng. Res. 2014, 9, 15715–15726.
82. Lusch, R.F.; Nambisan, S. Service innovation: A service-dominant logic perspective. MIS Q. 2015, 39, 155–176.
83. Palm, K. Understanding innovation as an approach to increasing customer value in the context of the public
sector. 2014. Available online: https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:773180/FULLTEXT01.pdf
(accessed on 21 December 2015).
84. Wu, J. Cooperation with competitors and product innovation: Moderating effects of technological capability
and alliances with universities. Ind. Mark. Manag. 2014, 43, 199–209. [CrossRef]
85. Aalbers, R.; Dolfsma,W. Innovation Networks: Managing the Networked Organization/Rick Aalbers and Wilfred
Dolfsma; Routledge: London, UK, 2015.
86. Cabanelas, P.; Omil, J.C.; Vázquez, X.H. A methodology for the construction of dynamic capabilities in
industrial networks: The role of border agents. Ind. Mark. Manag. 2013, 42, 992–1003. [CrossRef]
87. Macaulay, L.A.; Miles, I.; Wilby, J.; Tan, Y.L.; Zhao, L.; Theodoulidis, B. Case Studies in Service Innovation;
Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2012.
88. Anumba, C.J.; Egbu, C.O.; Carrillo, P.M. Knowledge Management in Construction; Blackwell Pub.: Oxford UK;
Malden, MA, USA, 2005; xiv; p. 226.
89. Connaughton, J.; Meikle, J. The changing nature of UK construction professional service firms. Build. Res.
Inf. 2013, 41, 95–109. [CrossRef]
90. Gabbott, M.; Hogg, G. Consumer involvement in services: A replication and extension. J. Bus. Res. 1999, 46,
159–166. [CrossRef]
91. Halpin, D.W.; Senior, B.A. Construction Management, 4th ed.;Wiley: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2011; p. 448.
359
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
92. Giang, D.T.H.; Pheng, L.S. Role of construction in economic development: Review of key concepts in the
past 40 years. Habitat Int. 2011, 35, 118–125. [CrossRef]
93. Kazi, A.S. Knowledge Management in the Construction Industry: A Socio-Technical Perspective; Idea Group Pub.:
Hershey, PA, USA, 2005; p. 384.
94. Korman, T.M.; Huey-King, L. Industry input for construction engineering and management courses:
Development of a building systems coordination exercise for construction engineering and management
students. Pract. Period. Struct. Design Constr. 2014, 19, 68–72. [CrossRef]
95. McCarthy, J.F. Construction Project Management; Pareto–Building Improvement: Westchester, IL, USA, 2010;
p. 432.
96. Chinese Academy of Science and Technology for Development. China National Innovation Index Report
2013. Available online: http://www.most.gov.cn/kjtj/201511/P020151117383919061369.pdf (accessed on 21
December 2015).
97. Zhao, K.; Xuan, A. Set pair theory-a new theory method of non-define and its applications. Syst. Eng. 1996,
14, 14–26.
98. Xing, W.; Ye, X.; Kui, L. Measuring convergence of China's ICT industry: An input–output analysis.
Telecommun. Policy 2011, 35, 301–313. [CrossRef]
99. Berezi ´ nski, P.; Jasiul, B.; Szpyrka, M. An entropy-based network anomaly detection method. Entropy 2015,
17, 2367–2408. [CrossRef]
100. Faed, A.; Chang, E.; Saberi, M.; Hussain, O.K.; Azadeh, A. Intelligent customer complaint handling utilising
principal component and data envelopment analysis (PDA). Appl. Soft Comput. J. 2015. [CrossRef]
101. Dong, X.; Guo, J.; Höök, M.; Pi, G. Sustainability assessment of the natural gas industry in China using
principal component analysis. Sustainability 2015, 7, 6102–6118. [CrossRef]
102. Chen, J.; Yang, X.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, L. Vulnerability and influence mechanisms of rural tourism
socio-ecological systems: A household survey in China‘s Qinling mountain area. Tour. Trib. 2015, 30,
64–75.
103. Likar, B.; Kopa, J.; Fatur, P. Innovation investment and economic performance in transition economies:
Evidence from Slovenia. Innov. Manag. Policy Pract. 2014, 16, 53–66. [CrossRef]
104. Hemphill, T.A. Policy debate: The US advanced manufacturing initiative: Will it be implemented as an
innovation—Or industrial—Policy? Innov. Manag. Policy Pract. 2014, 16, 67–70. [CrossRef]
105. Cabrilo, S.; Grubic-Nesic, L. Ic-Based Innovation Gap Assessment: A Support Tool for the Creation of
Effective Innovation Strategies in the Knowledge Era. In Proceedings of the 4th European Conference on
Intellectual Capital, Helsinki, Finland, 23–24 April 2012.
106. Martinez, M.G. Co-creation of value by open innovation: Unlocking new sources of competitive advantage.
Agribusiness 2014, 30, 132–147. [CrossRef]
107. Hsieh, M.; Wu, C.; Ting, P.; Lin, T. A study on project partner's alignment process and value innovation.
Mark. Rev. 2013, 10, 345–370.
108. Reitzig, M.; Puranam, P. Value appropriation as an organizational capability: The case of IP protection
through patents. Strat. Manag. J. 2009, 30, 765–789. [CrossRef]
109. Giannopoulou, E.; YstrÖM, A.; Ollila, S. Turning open innovation into practice: Open innovation research
through the lens of managers. Int. J. Innov. Manag. 2011, 15, 505–524. [CrossRef]
110. Roy, M.; Donaldson, C.; Baker, R.; Kerr, S. The potential of social enterprise to enhance health and well-being:
A model and systematic review. Soc. Sci. Med. 2014, 123, 182–193. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Bolanos, A.B. External Vulnerabilities and Economic Integration: Is the Union of South American Nations a
Promising Project? J. Econ. Dev. 2014, 39, 97–131.
112. Culpepper, P.D.; Reinke, R. Structural power and bank bailouts in the United Kingdom and the United States.
Polit. Soc. 2014, 42, 427–454. [CrossRef]
113. Murphy, E.; Scott, M. Household vulnerability in rural areas: Results of an index applied during a housing
crash, economic crisis and under austerity conditions. Geoforum 2014, 51, 75–86. [CrossRef]
114. Ala, M.U. A firm-level analysis of the vulnerability of the Bangladeshi pharmaceutical industry to the trips
agreement: Implications for R&D capability and technology transfer. Proced. Econ. Finance 2013, 5, 30–39.
115. Tomes, A. UK government science policy: The 'enterprise deficit' fallacy. Technovation 2003, 23, 785–792.
[CrossRef]
360
Sustainability 2016, 8, 17
116. Al-Sudairi, M.; Bakry, S.H. Knowledge issues in the global innovation index: Assessment of the State of
Saudi Arabia versus countries with distinct development. Innov. Manag. Policy Pract. 2014, 16, 176–183.
[CrossRef]
117. Kiskiene, A. Scientific knowledge and technology transfer policy in the EU. Econ. Bus. 2014, 26, 36–43.
[CrossRef]
118. Ljungquist, U. Unbalanced dynamic capabilities as obstacles of organizational efficiency: Implementation
issues in innovative technology adoption. Innov. Manag. Policy Pract. 2014, 16, 82–95. [CrossRef]
© 2015 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
361
Article
Research on Consumers’ UseWillingness and
Opinions of Electric Vehicle Sharing: An Empirical
Study in Shanghai
NingWang * and Runlin Yan
School of Automotive Studies, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China; woaiwojia13147@163.com
* Correspondence: wangning@tongji.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-21-6958-3874
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 19 October 2015; Accepted: 17 December 2015; Published: 23 December 2015
Abstract: An empirical study in Shanghai was performed to explore consumers’ use willingness
and opinions on electric vehicle sharing (EVS) to help operators effectively operate and expand
the new business model. Through the multinomial logistic regression developed for different
groups, the results show that the factors of the main trip mode in daily use, monthly transportation
expenditure, driving range of electric vehicles, gender, age, marital status and occupation have
significant influences on consumers’ use willingness. In short, the population characteristics of
people choosing to use EVS are male, aged between 18 and 30 and usually taking the subway and
bus as the daily transportation modes. Otherwise, the factors of the acceptable highest price of EVS,
occupation and personal monthly income have significant impacts on the use willingness of people
who keep a neutral stance. These people pay more attention to convenience and the economy of EVS.
These results reveal that a reasonable price, accurate positioning of target groups, convenient site
layout and usage are required for operators to successfully launch a new transportation mode of EVS.
Keywords: electric vehicle sharing; multinomial logistic regression; survey; use willingness
1. Introduction
Research indicates that electric vehicles are not only able to decrease vehicle emissions [1] and
slow global warming [2], but also are able to enhance the sustainability of road traffic in the future [3].
With energy, environment and other issues becoming increasingly prominent, many countries began
to realize the importance of environmentally-friendly electric vehicles. Most manufacturers also have
started to develop and commercialize environmentally-friendly electric vehicles [4]. However, electric
vehicles are currently limited by insufficient charging infrastructures and driving mileage (the longest
driving range per battery charge). Considering that car sharing is more suitable for people’s short-term
travel demands, the combination of electric vehicles and car sharing is a good way to avoid these
weaknesses and to provide a cleaner transport mode.
Certain cities in the world, such as Barcelona, Paris, Berlin, Hamburg, Rotterdam and Stockholm,
are implementing electric vehicle sharing (EVS) [5]. In China, EVS is still in the initial development
phase. China Car Club in Hangzhou and Eduoauto in Beijing are the pioneers for developing EVS.
China Car Club was invested in by Intunecapital in early 2013, and it is based on the model of
self-purchasing cars. Eduoauto is based on the model of light assets, and the operational vehicles are
mainly provided by enterprises qualified for car rental, not bought by the company itself. eHi Car
Services launched a pilot EVS program in Jading district of Shanghai in June 2013, but the progress
is very slow. At present, there are several EVS services, such as EVCARD hosted by Shanghai
International Automobile City, YiKaZuChe in Beijing, Weigongjiao in Hangzhou, etc.
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7; doi:10.3390/su8010007 362 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
In recent years, governments have begun to attach more importance to EVS, which contributed to
the rapid development of EVS. In July 2014, the General Office of the State Council in China released
the No. 35 document of “Instructions on accelerating the promotion and application of new energy
vehicles” [6], which emphasized the needs of “exploring innovative business models, such as the
time-sharing leasing, car sharing, vehicle leasing, mortgage purchase for new energy vehicles, etc.”.
The EVS program also has received support from the local governments. The Beijing Municipal Science
and Technology Commission has listed EVS as a key supported project and set up many operational
indicators. Other cities, such as Shanghai, Hangzhou, Shaoxing, Ningbo, Wuhan, Shenzhen, Yancheng,
Chongqing, and so on, have launched or are actively ready to launch an EVS program.
From the analysis above, it can be known that the number of EVS enterprises operating is few,
and most of them lack experience. With the support from the government, there will be more and
more domestic companies involved in EVS in the next few foreseeable years. Nevertheless, how
consumers think about EVS, whether they will use the service and their related preference are still
unclear. Therefore, in order to promote all-round development of EVS and to help the enterprises
achieve better operation, a questionnaire was designed to collect information about the acceptance of
consumers and influencing factors for using EVS. Some suggestions are provided for EVS operators to
promote its rapid development in China.
2. Literature Review
In the late 1980s, a preliminary model of car sharing appeared abroad. However, scholars started
to research car sharing in the 1990s. At the beginning of the research, most studies were at the
qualitative level, and scholars paid more attention to the feasibility of the car sharing model and
consumer usage. Based on a large number of empirical studies, Meijkamp [7] in The Netherlands
pointed out that car sharing as an alternative to private cars, because it had higher economic and
ecological efficiency. Barth and Shaheen [8] had an opinion that car sharing could improve the traffic
efficiency by reducing the number of private cars and improve the efficiency of energy and emissions.
They also introduced a variety of car sharing systems and described the development prospect of car
sharing in China. Prettenthaler and Steininger [9] researched how driving mileage influenced the car
sharing users to make decisions. Results showed that using car sharing was better than using private
cars when user’s travel range was less than 18,000 km per year. However, if insurance and the vehicle
depreciation rate are taken into account, the balanced driving distance of users decreased to 15,000 km.
Seik [10] studied car sharing in Singapore and found that members still mainly used public transport
for travelling to work after attaining membership, but turned more often to shared cars rather than
public transport for marginal uses, such as leisure and social trips. Most of them chose car sharing for
its marginal use and cost savings.
Entering the 21st century, foreign scholars gradually began to study the operation system of car
sharing, the optimization of staff, site layout, vehicle allocation, etc., from the quantitative perspective.
Barth and Todd [11] used a computer to simulate the distribution of available vehicles and energy
consumption in car sharing sites. Results showed that the influencing factors of the car sharing system
were the proportion of demand, the charging strategy for the electric vehicles and the vehicle allocation
algorithm. The main problems of the car sharing service that should be considered at the beginning of
the establishment were service pricing, target customer selection, vehicle type selection, site location,
etc. [12]. Xu and Lim [13] established a mathematical model for the vehicles sharing site layout in
Singapore and used the improved neural network model to predict the car sharing net flows. Kek et
al. [14] provided a three-stage decision optimization model for the car sharing operator. They analyzed
the optimal distribution of staff and vehicles and used operational data from the Singapore sharing
company to verify the model. Correia and Antunes [15] had studied the problem of car sharing
site planning. Under the goal of maximizing the profit for the car sharing operating company, they
established a mixed integer programming model to solve the unbalanced number of sharing cars
between different sites.
363
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
At present, there are few research works on EVS abroad, and most of them focus on operating
status analysis and consumer surveys. Quantitative studies on EVS are rare. Alessandro et al. [16]
introduced the EVS project of Green Move and studied the shared service strategies and objectives. By
investigating the feasibility of EVS as a private car for elderly, Shaheen et al. [17] found that 30% of
respondents were interested in participating, but all participants would make a plan before they would
use the car, indicating that EVS still has the range anxiety problem. This problem is caused by the
limited driving range of electric vehicles. Using data from 533 members of the EVS program in Seoul,
Kim et al. [18] found that the participants were rather reluctant to change their car ownership, but had
intensions to continue participating in the program. Social and economic perspectives were the most
important factors affecting the participants’ attitudes. In addition, the attitudes varied depending on
personal characteristics, such as gender, age and income.
Domestic research progress on the car sharing model is relatively late. In 2000, Huang and
Yang [19] were the first to research car sharing and introduced its development history abroad.
They summarized the benefits of this new public transport pattern, the impact on travel behavior
and its possible target market (people who have no private cars or have a high cost of ownership).
Market demand, quality of service and advanced public transportation are important factors for
successful car sharing. Ye and Yang [20] summarized and introduced the concept, development status
and influence of car sharing. They also explained its characteristics (low-cost, flexible) and target group
(replacement selection for people who wanted to buy a second car). Gao [21] explained the concept of
“shared car” in detail and presented the concept of “Auto Club”. Its development prospect in China
was also studied. Qiu [22] analyzed the key influencing factors for car sharing development in China.
Results showed that educational level of respondents, number of owned private cars and convenience
of EVS had impacts on consumers’ use willingness. Xue et al. [23] combed the classification of car
sharing and analyzed the impact of this service on car ownership, travel cost, usage cost, energy
savings and emission reduction. Through an empirical study, they found that the target group of
car sharing was people who are 25–40 years old and have an above average educational level. The
model of Zipcar in the United States was studied by Wu [24]. He investigated the potential market of
car sharing service in Guangzhou and demonstrated the significance of promoting car sharing. He
pointed out that car sharing is very promising in China and will be an alternative to other means of
transportation. By introducing the development of car sharing in Hanover, He [25] pointed out that
a shared car could replace 6–10 private cars and radically reduce automobile usage. Xia et al. [26]
had carried out empirical research on an informal car sharing service in Beijing from the perspective
of economic and ecological efficiency. They suggested that the government should regulate such an
industry and formulate relevant policies to support the development of shared services.
From the analysis above, it is obvious that domestic research on EVS is very small in quantity.
More studies are focused on the operating model description, case analysis and the prospect forecast
of traditional vehicle sharing. From the perspective of operators, a questionnaire was implemented
in Shanghai to find factors affecting consumers’ use willingness of electric vehicle sharing, including
travel characteristics, expectation of EVS and socio-demographics and then proposed corresponding
suggestions for station location, driving range choice and model selection for EVS. At the same time,
the target group and potential market in Shanghai for using EVS were pointed out. This will help the
operations of enterprises effectively.
3. Research Method
3.1. Questionnaire Design
The paper questionnaire was implemented and disseminated offline. Through this, we have
learned comprehensive knowledge about EVS acceptance. Finally, the target population of EVS was
pointed out by analysis.
The questionnaire was divided into three parts. The first part has three questions about travel
characteristics, including main trip mode in daily use, factors considered when choosing the trip mode
364
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
and monthly transportation expenditure. Based on a simple explanation of EVS, the second part
was questions about the expectations of EVS, including the use willingness, the attractive point for
the respondent, the suitable usage scenario, etc. The last part was personal information, including
gender, age, occupation, educational level, marital status, personal monthly income, etc. The whole
questionnaire was designed as shown in Table 1.
Table 1. The designed questionnaire for investigation. EVS, electric vehicle sharing.
Variable Description
Travel characteristics
Main trip mode in daily use Subway, bus, private car, taxi, walking,
bicycle, motorcycle/scooter riders
Factors considered when
choosing the trip mode
Time, expenditure, weather condition,
degree of comfort, travel distance, travel
purpose, body condition, others
Monthly transportation
expenditure
ď100 yuan, 101–200 yuan, 201–300 yuan,
301–400 yuan, ě401 yuan
Expectation of EVS
Whether to choose EVS Will choose, keep neutral stance, will not
choose
Attractive points of using EVS
Convenient appointment, cost-effective,
shorter distance, parking space saving, no
overhead cost, others
Suitable usage scenario of EVS
Work, school, shopping, entertainment,
seeing a doctor, visiting relatives or friends,
individual business, work business, others
Suitable vehicle type for EVS
Mini car, small car, compact car, midsize car,
medium and large size car, luxury car, SUV,
MPV (multi-purpose vehicles), microvan
Acceptable minimum driving
range of EV
Not less than 50 km, not less than 80 km,
not less than 120 km, not less than 150 km,
not less than 200 km, not less than 250 km,
not less than 300 km, not less than 350 km
Acceptable maximum
duration for going to stations
Time for walking is 5 min, time for walking
is 10 min, time for walking is 15 min
Acceptable maximum
duration for waiting and
handling procedure
5 min, 10 min, 15 min
Acceptable highest price of
EVS
30 yuan/month + 60 yuan/h,
30 yuan/month + 40 yuan/h,
30 yuan/month + 20 yuan/h
Socio-demographics
Gender Male, female
Age Under 18, 18–25, 26–30, 31–40, 41–50, above
50
Number of owned private cars None, one, not less than two
Marital status Single, married, but have no child,
married and have kids
Educational level
Junior high school and the following: senior
high school, junior college, Bachelor’s,
Master’s and above
Occupation
Party and government
cadre/teacher/police, clerk, business
owner/shareholder, etc., technicist,
worker/server, company management
personnel, freelancer,
retired staff/student
Personal monthly income
Under 1000 yuan, 1000–3000 yuan,
3001–6000 yuan, 6001–10,000 yuan,
10,001–15,000 yuan, above 15,001 yuan,
no fixed income
* The black bold items are reference categories used in the multinomial logistic regression model.
365
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
3.2. Data Collection
From May 2014–November 2014, 410 respondents participated in the survey. As is known to all,
EVS is more convenient than bus, more predictable and accurate than taxi and more economical than
private cars. For the above reasons, EVS will replace part of the public and private transportation in
the future. Therefore, the investigation object should be universal to balance people with different
characteristics. Choosing residents in Shanghai as the main investigation object, questionnaires were
distributed randomly at railway stations, commercial shopping centers, bus stop waiting areas, public
squares, university areas, and so on. According to the standard that the number of answers for one
questionnaire should be not less than half, 394 effective questionnaires were received.
3.3. Model Formulation
In this paper, choice willingness for EVS (“will not choose” is coded as 1, “keeping neutral” as 2,
“will choose” as 3) is the dependent variable, which is ordinal. Ordinal regression was used, and a
test of the parallel lines was done to check whether the method was appropriate. According to the
research of Zhang [27] and Li et al., [28], when the value of P for the test of parallel lines is far less than
0.05, this indicates that the ordinal regression is not appropriate, and multinomial logistic regression
should be used. As shown in Table 2, the value of significance (Sig.) is 0.001, which is far less than 0.05.
Therefore, multinomial logistic regression is used in this paper, finally.
Table 2. Test of parallel lines.
Model ´2 Log Likelihood Chi-Square df Sig.
Null Hypothesis 667.011
General 579.259 87.751 51 0.001
The multinomial logistic regression model is often used to handle the case where the dependent
variable has several classified categories (N > 2). During the process, the model will choose one category
of dependent variable as the reference category to establish the general logits models. Furthermore, if
the dependent variable Y is coded 0, 1 or 2 and using Y = 0 as the baseline, the probabilities of each
dependent variable category [29] are:
P pY “ 0q “ 1
1 ` eg1pxq ` eg2pxq (1)
P pY “ 1q “ eg1pxq
1 ` eg1pxq ` eg2pxq (2)
P pY “ 2q “ eg2pxq
1 ` eg1pxq ` eg2pxq (3)
where:
g1 pxq “ logit
P pY “ 1q
P pY “ 0q
“ β10 ` β11x1 ` . . . ` β1pxp (4)
g2 pxq “ logit
P pY “ 2q
P pY “ 0q
“ β20 ` β21x1 ` . . . ` β2pxp (5)
where β10, β11, β1p, . . . , β2p are coefficients for the logistic regression model, which can be obtained by
using SPSS software.
366
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
4. Analysis Results
4.1. Descriptive Statistics
4.1.1. Demographic Variable
Table 3 illustrates the demographic characteristics of respondents. As shown in Table 3, most
respondents are male (61.6%), which is higher than the proportion of women. The main age groups
are 20s and 30s, which should be the major groups for using EVS. Forty one-point-seven percent of
respondents are single, and the percentage of married having kids is 37.6%. Fifty eight-point-six
percent of people have private cars, and 7.9% of them even have two or more cars. Most respondents
(68.3%) had a Bachelor’s degree or above. The monthly income is mainly concentrated in
3001–10,000 yuan (49.1%), and more than 15,000 yuan or below 1000 yuan are the least, which accords
with the research. The distribution of the occupation is relatively balanced overall. Ordinary staff and
technical staff account for 20.2%, respectively.
Table 3. Descriptive statistics for the demographic characteristics of respondents.
Variable Description Percentage
Gender
Male 61.6%
Female 38.4%
Age
Under 18 1.5%
18–25 28.1%
26–30 30%
31–40 24.6%
41–50 8.4%
Above 50 5.4%
Number of owned private cars
None 41.4%
One 50.7%
Not less than two 7.9%
Marital status
Single 41.7%
Married, but have no child 20.7%
Married and have kids 37.6%
Educational level
Junior high school and the following: 3.6%
Senior high school 10.2%
Junior college 17.9%
Bachelor’s 49.1%
Master’s and above 19.2%
Occupation
Party and government
cadre/teacher/police 7.2%
Clerk 20.2%
Business owner/shareholder, etc. 4.3%
Technicist 20.2%
Worker/server 5.4%
Company management personnel 7.9%
Freelancer 5.4%
Retired staff/student 29.4%
Personal monthly income
Under 1000 yuan 5.3%
1000–3000 yuan 18.5%
3001–6000 yuan 26.6%
6001–10,000 yuan 24.0%
10,001–15,000 yuan 10.6%
Above 15,001 yuan 6.6%
No fixed income 8.4%
367
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
4.1.2. Travel Characteristics
As shown in Figure 1, 83.5% of percipients have a monthly transportation expenditure within
300 yuan. The percentage spending more than 400 yuan monthly is only 10.4%. In the aspect of factors
considered when choosing the trip mode, most respondents consider time primarily. The secondary is
travel purpose, and cost is the least considerable factor (Figure 2). The above result conforms to the
normal situation that residents in big cities consider travel time, cost, convenience, safety and comfort
when they choose the trip mode [30].
22.9%
36.4%
24.2%
6.1% 10.4%
Under􀀃100􀀃yuan 101􀍲200􀀃yuan
201􀍲300􀀃yuan 301􀍲400􀀃yuan
Above􀀃400􀀃yuan
Figure 1. Distribution of monthly transportation expenditure.
23.30%
15.80%
11%
12.30%
15.10%
16.40%
5.50%
0.40%
Time Expenditure
Weather􀀃condition Degree􀀃of􀀃comfort
Travel􀀃distance Travel􀀃purpose
Body􀀃condition Others
Figure 2. Factors considered when choosing the trip mode.
4.1.3. Expectations for EVS
With assistance from the investigators, respondents had preliminarily knowledge of EVS.
The percentage of people who chose to use EVS is 42.4%. About 27% of people kept a neutral
stance, which means quite a few people still maintain a wait-and-see attitude towards new things.
This will be a customer resource to pursue during the development of EVS in the near future. The
distribution of use willingness is shown as Figure 3.
30.6%
27.0%
42.4%
Will􀀃not􀀃choose Keep􀀃neutral􀀃stance Will􀀃choose
Figure 3. Whether to choose EVS.
When the respondents were asked about the attractiveness of EVS, their opinions were rather
dispersed. More respondents selected the options of “the appointment and self-help picking cars are
convenient and efficient”, “it charges by hour and that is more cost-effective than renting for one day”
368
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
and “it is more flexible than leasing and has no overhead costs” (as shown in Figure 4). It can be
concluded that most consumers pay more attention to the convenience and economic benefits of the
EVS service. Therefore, the service price should be as low as possible to offer consumers a chance to
experience its economy and convenience, thus enlarging customer population.
21.2%
19.4%
13.4%
15.9%
28.3%
The􀀃appointment􀀃and􀀃self􀍲help􀀃picking􀀃cars􀀃are􀀃convenient􀀃and􀀃efficient
Its􀀃meter􀀃charges􀀃by􀀃hour􀀃and􀀃is􀀃more􀀃cost􀍲effective􀀃than􀀃renting􀀃for􀀃one􀀃day
Shorter􀀃distance􀀃from􀀃starting/terminal􀀃point
Saving􀀃parking􀀃space
It􀀃is􀀃more􀀃flexible􀀃than􀀃leasing􀀃and􀀃has􀀃no􀀃overhead􀀃costs
Figure 4. Attractive points of using EVS.
When the respondents were asked about the suitable usage scenario of EVS, the two options
that had the largest proportions are shopping and entertainment, with percentages of 22.1% and
23.8%, respectively (Figure 5). As a result, stations for EVS can be deployed around shopping malls,
entertainment and leisure centers, so it can be convenient for users to rent and return vehicles.
17.3%
10.3%
22.1% 23.8%
3.1%
10.7% 5.0%
2.8% 4.8%
Work School Shopping
Entertainment Seeing􀀃a􀀃doctor Visiting􀀃relatives􀀃or􀀃friends
Individual􀀃business Work􀀃business Others
Figure 5. Suitable usage scenario of EVS.
For the question of suitable vehicle type for EVS, respondents said that compact, small or mini
cars would be more suitable. Cars of the A0 segment (small cars) accounted for the highest percentage
of 27.2%. Respondents also preferred compact cars and mini cars (Figure 6). This also suggests that
EVS is mainly used to meet people’s needs for daily short-distance flexible transportation, and their
demand for space is small.
22.2%
27.2%
15.5%
6.7%
10.8%
4.1%
10.0%
2.1% 1.6%
Mini􀀃car􀀃(􀀃Chery􀀃QQ􀀃)
Small􀀃car􀀃(􀀃VW􀀃POLO􀀃)
Compact􀀃car􀀃(􀀃Focus􀀃)
Midsize􀀃car􀀃(􀀃Accord􀀃)
Medium􀀃and􀀃large􀀃size􀀃car􀀃(􀀃Audi􀀃A6L􀀃)
Luxury􀀃car􀀃(􀀃BMW􀀃7􀍲series􀀃)
SUV􀀃(􀀃Haver􀀃H6􀀃)
MPV􀀃(􀀃Buick􀀃GL8􀀃)
Microvan
Figure 6. Suitable vehicle types for EVS.
369
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
When asked about the acceptable minimum driving range of electric vehicles, 26.8% of
respondents held the opinion that it should not be less than 150 km, as shown in Figure 7. The sum of
percentages for “not less than 50 km”, “not less than 80 km”, “not less than 120 km” and “not less than
150 km” is 79.2%. A deep travel behavior investigation was done in 2014 with 67 residents in Shanghai.
All travel behaviors were recorded for 14 days, including trip mode, time, distance, etc. The results
show that the average travel distance for a single trip is 15.8 km, and the average daily travel range
is 33.8 km, which is far lower than what the mainstream models on the market can offer. Another
research work showed that when consumers were asked about the driving range for private electric
vehicles, 35.8% of them responded that it should be between 120 km and 160 km [31]. Thus, it can be
seen that most participants have higher tolerance towards the driving range of shared electric vehicles
than private ones.
7.3%
19.7%
25.5%
26.8%
8.3%
4.7% 3.9% 3.9%
Not􀀃less􀀃than􀀃50􀀃km Not􀀃less􀀃than􀀃80􀀃km Not􀀃less􀀃than􀀃120􀀃km
Not􀀃less􀀃than􀀃150􀀃km Not􀀃less􀀃than􀀃200􀀃km Not􀀃less􀀃than􀀃250􀀃km
Not􀀃less􀀃than􀀃300􀀃km Not􀀃less􀀃than􀀃350􀀃km
Figure 7. Acceptable minimum driving range of EV.
4.2. Statistics in Cross Tabulation Table
Figure 8 indicates that the number of owned private cars has an impact on the willingness to
use EVS.
(1)With an increase in the number of owned private cars, the ratio of people who are willing to
use the service shows a declining trend soon after rising. That is to say, the EVS acceptance of people
in possession of only one private car is higher than that of people who do not have or have more than
one private car. The reasons for this phenomenon may be that: (i) people in possession of private cars
have more driving experience, and it is easier for them to accept a new transportation pattern; (ii) the
EVS is a new type of transportation, and even the people who have a private car want to experience
this new transportation system; (iii) because of severe traffic jams during rush hour, parking difficulty
and high parking fees, a car owner is more willing to choose EVS as a method for short trips; (iv)
the economic environment of people who have two or more private cars is better, and they tend not
to consider whether the means of travel is economical. Compared to people who only have one car,
reducing their usage willingness is also reasonable. At the same time, it also indicates that the target
group of EVS is not only the people who have no private cars.
370
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
25.90% 31%
48.40%
31.5% 24.4%
22.6%
42.6% 44.7%
29.0%
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
None One Not􀀃less􀀃than􀀃two
Choose
Neutral
Not􀀃choose
Figure 8. The relationship between willingness and the number of owned private cars.
(2) Along with the increase of owned private cars, people’s attitude towards whether to adopt
EVS becomes clearer. The ratio of keeping neutral decreases.
4.3. Multinomial Logistic Regression for the Target Group
In this paper, the dependent variable is the choice willingness for EVS (“will not choose” is coded
as one, “keeping neutral” as two, “will choose” as three). In order to define the target group of EVS,
multinomial logistic regression was used. Independent variables were selected from three aspects: (1)
travel characteristics (including main trip mode in daily use and monthly transportation expenditure),
(2) expectations for EVS (including acceptable minimum driving range of the EV, acceptable maximum
duration for going to stations, acceptable maximum duration for the waiting and handling procedure
and acceptable highest price of EVS) and (3) demographic characteristics (including gender, age,
number of owned private cars, marital status, educational level, occupation and personal monthly
income).
4.3.1. Model Fitting Test
SPSS20.0 was used to analyze the questionnaires, and Table 4 shows the likelihood ratio test for
the final model and the intercept-only model. Here, the value of chi-squared is equal to the difference
value between the ´2 log likelihood in the intercept-only model and the final model. The significance
level of the chi-squared test was 0.001, which is far less than 0.05. Therefore, the final model is superior
to the intercept-only model, which means that the final model is established, and the fitting effect is
significantly good. The indexes of Cox and Snell R-squares, Nagelkerke R-squared and McFadden
R-squared were used to test the explainable degree of the equations on the variation of the explained
variables. The bigger the R-squared is, the better the goodness of fit is. The value of these three indexes
are 0.353, 0.400 and 0.204, and they indicate that independent variables can explain 35.3%, 40% and
20.4% of the variation of the explained variables. Although the three R-squared values are not very
high, the result is acceptable.
Table 4. Model fitting information.
Model
Model Fitting
Criteria Likelihood Ratio Tests R2
´2 log likelihood Chi-square Sig. Cox and
Snell Nagelkerke McFadden
Intercept-only 762.673 - - - - -
Final 607.323 155.350 0.001 0.353 0.400 0.204
371
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
4.3.2. Coefficient Test of Variables
Table 5 shows the likelihood-ratio test in the final model for each independent variable.
Through the statistical results, it can be seen that main trip mode in daily use, monthly transportation
expenditure, acceptable minimum driving range of the EV, acceptable highest price of EVS, age and
marital status have significant influences on the willingness to use EVS when the significance level is
0.1 [18]. People who usually take the subway or bus for daily transportation have a strong willingness
to use EVS. People with a high monthly transportation expenditure are more likely to pursue the
economical mode of EVS. Marital status often decides whether the respondents need to buy private
cars, and this has a great impact on the decision to use the EVS service. The driving range of EV
affects respondents’ decisions of whether to choose the shared service instead of other modes of
transportation. Respondents aged between 20 and 40 years old show a stronger receptivity to new
things and the concept that they must have private cars is weaker. This makes them more willing to
use the EVS service.
Table 5. Likelihood ratio test.
Effect
Model Fitting Criteria Likelihood Ratio Tests
´2 log likelihood of
reduced model Chi-square Sig.
Intercept 607.323 a 0.000 0.000
Main trip mode in daily use 632.206 24.883 0.015
Monthly transportation expenditure 631.696 24.373 0.002
Acceptable minimum driving range of EV 638.755 31.432 0.005
Acceptable maximum duration for going to
stations 611.525 4.202 0.379
Acceptable maximum duration for waiting and
handling procedure 612.404 5.081 0.279
Acceptable highest price of EVS 615.445 8.122 0.087
Gender 611.914 4.591 0.101
Age 633.589 26.266 0.003
Number of owned private cars 610.889 3.566 0.468
Marital status 624.302 16.979 0.002
Educational level 620.193 12.870 0.116
Occupation 624.859 17.536 0.229
Personal monthly income 621.654 14.331 0.280
a The ellipsis effect does not increase the degree of freedom. As a result, the simplified model is equal to the
final model.
4.3.3. Parameter Estimation Results
Tables 5 and 6 show the parameter estimation results of different groups. The reference category
for the dependent variable is choose not to use. The reference categories for the independent variables
are in black bold, as shown in Table 1.
If the estimated coefficient of a factor (B) is significantly positive, then the probability of this factor
belonging to the current category level is higher than the probability of it belonging to the reference
category, with all of the other factors being fixed [32].
Estimated Model Results of the Choose to Use Group
As shown in Table 6, the factors of main trip mode in daily use, monthly transportation
expenditure, driving range of electric vehicles, gender, age, marital status and occupation are
statistically significant. The following is a detailed analysis of these results. (1) People who usually take
the subway, bus or bike are more willing to use EVS. (2)With the increase of monthly transportation
expenditure, its regression coefficient changes from negative to positive, which indicates that the
higher the monthly transportation expenditure is, the more consumers prefer to choose EVS. (3) The
372
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
driving range of electric vehicles has a significant influence on consumers’ willingness to use EVS,
with a negative coefficient. The absolute value of the coefficient increases as the driving range of
electric vehicles increases, indicating that when the driving range of electric vehicles is higher, more
consumers tend not to use EVS services. This result conflicts with previous expectations. The reasons
may be that EVS is designed to provide a short commute for people, and the driving range of general
electric vehicles has been able to meet that demand. The total cost of the operator increases as the
driving range of electric vehicles increases, and then, the single use price for EVS may increase. For
reasons of travel economy, consumers are more reluctant to use this business. It should be pointed out
that the front reason is just guesswork; further research is required to give more information and to
find out the cause. (4) Gender is significant to consumers’ use willingness, with the probability ratio of
male being 2.081-times higher than that of female. This means that males are more willing to use EVS
than females. (5) Age has a significant influence on consumers’ choices, and the coefficient is positive.
The absolute value of the coefficient decreases as the age increases, which indicates that consumers’
use willingness of EVS will be reduced as the age increases. People who are aged between 18 and 30
have the strongest use willingness. The reasons may be that this group is at the beginning of economic
independence and usually pursue economic and effective ways to travel, and their receptivity to new
modes of transportation is better. (6) Marital status is significant with a negative coefficient, indicating
that the use willingness of unmarred people is lower than that of married people. This may controvert
the former expectations. However, through the former analysis, the results can be obtained that people
who own private cars have a stronger use willingness than people having no cars (that can be found
in Figure 8). In this investigation, 73.2% of participants having private cars are married. Therefore,
the use willingness of married people being higher than that of unmarried people is understandable.
From the analysis above, the population characteristics of people choosing to use EVS are male, aged
between 18 and 30, and usually taking the subway and bus as the daily transportation modes.
Table 6. Parameter estimation results: choose to use.
Independent Variables B Wald Sig. Exp(B)
Intercept ´2.283 1.437 0.231
[Main trip mode in daily use = 1]: subway 1.705 2.870 0.090 5.499
[Main trip mode in daily use = 2]: bus 2.016 3.750 0.053 7.508
[Main trip mode in daily use = 6]: bicycle 3.226 7.190 0.007 25.173
[Monthly transportation expenditure = 1]: 0–100 yuan ´1.260 3.092 0.079 0.284
[Monthly transportation expenditure = 4]: 301–400 yuan 1.606 3.593 0.058 4.981
[Minimum driving range of EV = 4]: not less than 150 km ´1.882 3.523 0.061 0.152
[Minimum driving range of EV = 6]: not less than 250 km ´2.564 4.403 0.036 0.077
[Minimum driving range of EV = 7]: not less than 300 km ´4.939 12.600 0.000 0.007
[Gender = 1]: male 0.733 4.517 0.034 2.081
[Age = 2]: 18–25 years old 3.571 10.951 0.001 35.556
[Age = 3]: 26–30 years old 2.194 4.545 0.033 8.969
[Marital status = 1]: single ´2.289 11.271 0.001 0.101
[Occupation = 3]: business owner/shareholder, etc. 2.154 4.159 0.041 8.619
Estimated Model Results of the Choose to Remain Neutral Group
As shown in Table 7, the factors of acceptable highest price of EVS, occupation and personal
monthly income have significant impacts on the use willingness of people who keep a neutral stance.
The detailed analysis is as follows. (1) The acceptable highest price of EVS is significant to consumers’
use willingness with a negative coefficient, indicating that the increasing service price could reduce
consumers' willingness to use it. (2) Business owners/shareholders hold a neutral opinion about the
EVS service. This may relate to their existing economic and social status, etc. These people have better
living conditions, and they may not need this service to save money or improve travel conditions.
(3) The probability of keeping neutral is higher than that of not choosing, which indicates that the
373
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
exclusion effect of people with lower average monthly income for EVS is reduced. From the analysis
above, people who keep a neutral stance have lower personal monthly income. If we want to encourage
these people to change their existing attitude to use the EVS, a reasonable price should be offered to
attract them to join in on the premise of guaranteeing profits.
Table 7. Parameter estimation results: choose to remain neutral.
Independent Variables B Wald Sig. Exp(B)
Intercept ´2.888 1.743 0.187
[Acceptable highest price of EVS = 1]:
30 yuan/month + 60 yuan/h
´0.829 2.864 0.091 0.436
[Occupation = 3]: business owner/shareholder, etc. 1.887 2.924 0.087 6.598
[Personal monthly income = 1]: below 1000 yuan 2.348 4.402 0.036 10.463
[Personal monthly income = 2]: 1000–3000 yuan 1.767 4.051 0.044 5.854
Prediction for Use Proportion
As shown in Table 2, most respondents are male clerks aged 26–30 years old and have an average
monthly income of 3001–6000 yuan. For a respondent having these features, the probability that he
will choose, not choose and keep a neutral stance can be calculated by Equations (1)–(5) according to
the multinomial logistic regression results.
g1 “ ´2.283`0.733`2.194`1.169 “ 1.758 (6)
g2 “ ´2.888`0.363`0.817`0.768 “ 0.215 (7)
P pY “ will chooseq “ eg1
1 ` eg1 ` eg2
“ 0.721 (8)
P pY “ wil keep a neutral stanceq “ eg2
1 ` eg1 ` eg2
“ 0.154 (9)
P pY “ will not chooseq “ 1
1` eg1 ` eg2
“ 0.125 (10)
Therefore, the probability for a 26–30-year-old male clerk who has a personal monthly income of
3001–6000 yuan to use EVS is 72.1%.
According to the calculation method above, when other factors remain unchanged, the relationship
between age and the use probability ratio of male clerks who have a 3001–6000 yuan monthly income
can be obtained and is shown in Figure 9. It is possible to see that age has a great influence on personal
decisions to use the EVS, which is consistent with the former analysis. People aged 18–30 are more
likely to use EVS. When people’s age is more than 30 years old, the probability of not choosing is
bigger than that of choosing. Additionally, as the age increases, the probability of a neutral stance
increases, and consumers are more reluctant to use EVS. Furthermore, the post-1990s generation in
China is growing up, and their receptivity is better than other groups. They will be the major customers
of EVS in the near future. Therefore, the market space for EVS business is huge. The suggestion is that
the EVS service could aim at young people aged between 18 and 30 as their customers.
374
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
88.1%
72.1%
36.8%
28.7%
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
18􀍲25􀀃years􀀃old 26􀍲30􀀃years􀀃old 31􀍲40􀀃years􀀃old 41􀍲50􀀃years􀀃old
Choose􀀃to􀀃use Keep􀀃neutral Choose􀀃not􀀃use
Figure 9. The relationship between age and the willingness to using EVS.
In a similar way, when other factors keep constant, the relationship between personal monthly
income and the willingness to use EVS is shown as Figure 10. The following is the results. (1) Overall,
with the increase of personal monthly income, the choice probability of individuals to use EVS
decreases after rising first. When the personal monthly income is 3001–6000 yuan, the probability of
choosing reaches the maximum of 72.1%. (2) When the personal monthly income is low, the probability
of not choosing is high. The reason may be the relatively weak economic capacity of the low income
group. When the monthly income is higher (more than 15,001 yuan), the probability of choosing is
higher than that of not choosing. However, the value of the former is still below 50%, which indicates
that the probability of not choosing for consumers with high monthly income (more than 15,001 yuan)
is very big. This may be related to their social status, economic condition, etc. Therefore, EVS should
be geared toward the needs of the main group at middle-income level.
31.7%
55.9%
72.1%
54.4%
64.4%
45.3%
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Below􀀃1,000
yuan
1,000􀍲3,000
yuan
3,001􀍲6,000
yuan
6,001􀍲10,000
yuan
10,001􀍲15,000
yuan
Above􀀃15,001
yuan
Choose􀀃to􀀃use Keep􀀃neutral Choose􀀃not􀀃to􀀃use
Figure 10. The relationship between monthly income and the willingness to use EVS.
5. Suggestions
In the operational aspect, the following suggestions are offered for the development of EVS.
(1) According to the regression analysis results (Tables 6 and 7), people who are male, aged
between 18 and 30 and usually taking the subway and bus as the daily transportation mode are
the target group for using EVS. Combined with the probability calculation (Figures 9 and 10), the
suggestion is that operators should pay more attention to young people who are 18–30 years old and
have a middle-level income.
(2) In the early development of EVS, the type of shared electric vehicles should give priority to
compact, small or mini cars.
375
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
Car sharing is designed to satisfy people’s short, temporary and flexible transportation demand.
Most people will use it for shopping and entertainment (Figure 5), and they expect that the EVS would
be economical (Figure 4). Most people who would like to use EVS are young, and their income is not
very high (Figure 10). In order to decrease consumers’ use-cost to show the economy of sharing and
satisfy the need to carry certain items at the same time, the type of shared EV should focus on compact,
small or mini cars. This can reduce the cost of operators and indirectly reduce the use-cost of shared
cars. On the other hand, governments can offer certain subsidies to reduce the enterprises’ pressure on
operating funds in the early stage. This can promote the industrialization of electric vehicles and also
improve the operational enterprises' enthusiasm.
(3) In the early developmental stage, the driving range of shared electric vehicles should reach
120 km.
More than half of the respondents (Figure 7) said the driving range of shared electric vehicles
should reach 120 km at least, which indicates that most people hold tolerant attitudes towards the
problem of driving range. However, there were more than a quarter of people who hoped that the
driving range could reach 150 km. From regression the result in Table 6, it is indicated that the
increasing driving range will decrease consumers’ use willingness (the reason is stated in Section 4.3.3).
Therefore, in the early stage of development, for reasons of cost, capital, etc., it is recommended that
the driving range of shared electric vehicles should reach 120 km.
(4) When laying out the sites, the walking time for consumers to stations should be controlled to
be within 10 min.
Theoretically, the walking time for consumers to the stations should be as short as possible, which
means more sites are needed. However, more sites mean large amounts of money for investment, and
it is also likely to cause high operational and maintenance cost, a low utilization rate, etc. Therefore,
a reasonable number and layout of sites are needed to improve vehicle utilization, reduce operating
costs, and at the same time, meet consumers’ need for the convenient usage of cars. According to
Figures 11 and 12 92.5% of participants accept the walking time within 10 min. When the walking
time increases from five to 10 min, the percentage of people who are willing to use EVS decreases by
4.7%, which is acceptable. Considering the cost and utilization rate, the suggestion is that the walking
time for consumers to the station should be controlled to be within 10 min.
39.7% 52.7%
7.5%
5􀀃minutes􀀃walk
10􀀃minutes􀀃walk
15􀀃minutes􀀃walk
Figure 11. Acceptable maximum duration for going to stations (N = 385).
21.8%
17.1%
4.2%
0
20
40
60
80
100
5􀀃minutes􀀃walk 10􀀃minutes􀀃walk 15􀀃minutes􀀃walk
The􀀃number􀀃of􀀃people􀀃who􀀃are􀀃willing􀀃to􀀃use The􀀃proportion􀀃in􀀃total
Figure 12. The relationship between time for going to stations and use willingness (N = 385).
376
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
(5) The waiting time for consumers to go through the formalities and pick up cars should be
controlled within five minutes.
Convenient appointments and self-help picking up cars are some of the most attractive points that
consumers think the EVS service should have. As shown in Figures 13 and 14 89.4% of participants can
accept that the longest waiting time is within 10 min. However, when waiting time increases from five
to 10 min, the percentage of people who are willing to use EVS decreases from 24% to 14%, which is a
big decline. Therefore, services, such as picking up the cars or returning the cars, should be automatic
and self-supported. The suggestion is that operators should open a variety of channels for customers
to complete the procedures of booking, picking up cars, returning cars and paying the bill conveniently
and effectively. These can help control the total waiting time to be within five minutes.
57.70%
31.70%
10.60%
5􀀃minutes
10􀀃minutes
15􀀃minutes
Figure 13. Acceptable maximum duration for the waiting and handling procedure (N = 385).
24%
14%
5%
0
20
40
60
80
100
5􀀃minutes 10􀀃minutes 15􀀃minutes
The􀀃number􀀃of􀀃people􀀃who􀀃are􀀃willing􀀃to􀀃use The􀀃proportion􀀃in􀀃total
Figure 14. The relationship between waiting time and use willingness (N = 385).
6. Conclusions
In the early development of EVS, in order to achieve a good commercial operation, it is necessary
to investigate with respect to the consumers the important influencing factors for the acceptance of
EVS. Therefore, to solve these problems, a questionnaire was conducted in Shanghai. According to the
results, relevant suggestions are offered to achieve a wide range promotion of EVS.
Through the multiple logistic regression analysis, the factors of the main trip mode in daily use,
monthly transportation expenditure, acceptable minimum driving range of electric vehicles, gender,
age, marital status and occupation have significant influences on the willingness to choose EVS. Males
are more willing to use EVS than females. Younger people have a stronger receptivity to new things
than the old. As age increases, the use willingness of consumers decreases. In short, the population
characteristics of people choosing to use EVS are male, aged between 18 and 30 and usually taking the
subway and bus as the daily transportation modes. Otherwise, the factors of acceptable highest price
of EVS, occupation and personal monthly income have a significant impact on the use willingness of
people who keep a neutral stance. The increase of service price will reduce the use willingness, and
the exclusion effect of people with a low average monthly income is lower. As a result, if we want
to encourage these people to change their existing attitude to use EVS, a reasonable price should be
made to attract them to join on the premise of incurring no deficit. The probability for a 26–30 year-old
male clerk who has a personal monthly income of 3001–6000 yuan in Shanghai to use EVS is as high as
72.1%, which indicates that the development prospect for EVS in Shanghai is good.
377
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
In the operational aspects, suggestions are provided for operators as follows. (1) The operators
should pay more attention to people who are 18–30 years old and have a middle-level income. (2) In
the early development of EVS, the electric vehicles used for sharing should be concentrated on compact,
small or mini cars to achieve the aim of low-cost operation and good sharing economy. (3) The driving
range of shared electric vehicles should not be less than 120 km to reduce consumers' range anxiety. (4)
During the laying out of sites, a reasonable number of sites are necessary to guarantee that the walking
time to stations is within 10 min for consumers. (5) Operators need to optimize the leasing system and
implement automation and self-support as far as possible. This can help control the total waiting time
to within five minutes.
Acknowledgments: Acknowledgments: The research has been funded under the China MOST project of Electric
Car Sharing Technology Integration and Demonstration Operation (2015BAG11B00).
Author Contributions: Author Contributions: Ning Wang designed and performed this research. Runlin Yan
analyzed the data and wrote this paper. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Brady, J.; O’Mahony, M. Travel to work in Dublin. The potential impacts of electric vehicles on climate
change and urban air quality. Transp. Res. Part D 2011, 16, 188–193. [CrossRef]
2. Hawkins, T.R.; Singh, B.; Majeau-Bettez, G.; Stromman, A.H. Comparative environmental life cycle
assessment of conventional and electric vehicles. J. Ind. Ecol. 2013, 17, 53–64. [CrossRef]
3. Hanschke, C.B.; Uyterlinde, M.A.; Kroon, P.; Jeeninga, H.; Londo, H.M. Duurzame Innovatie in Het
Wegverkeer. Available online: https://www.ecn.nl/docs/library/report/2008/e08076.pdf (accessed on 2
December 2015). (In Dutch)
4. Sierzchula, W.; Bakker, S.; Maat, K.; Van Wee, B. The competitive environment of electric vehicles: An
analysis of prototype and production models. Environ. Innov. Soc. Transit. 2012, 2, 49–65. [CrossRef]
5. IEA (International Energy Agency). EV City Casebook. 2012. Available online: http://www.iea.org/
publications/freepublications/publication/EVCityCasebook.pdf (accessed on 2 December 2015).
6. Instructions of the General Office of the State Council in China on Accelerating the Promotion
and Application of New Energy Vehicles. Available online: http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/
2014–07/21/content_8936.htm (accessed on 21 July 2014).
7. Meijkamp, R. Changing consumer behaviour through eco-efficient services: An empirical study of car
sharing in the Netherlands. Bus. Strateg. Environ. 1998, 7, 234–244. [CrossRef]
8. Barth, M.; Shaheen, S.A. The Potential for Shared-Use Vehicle Systems in China. Available online:
http://76.12.4.249/artman2/uploads/1/UCD-ITS-RR-03-11.pdf (accessed on 2 December 2015).
9. Prettenthaler, F.E.; Steininger, K.W. From ownership to service use lifestyle: The potential of car sharing. Ecol.
Econ. 1999, 28, 443–453. [CrossRef]
10. Seik, T.F. Vehicle ownership restraints and car sharing in Singapore. Habitat Int. 2000, 24, 75–90. [CrossRef]
11. Barth, M.; Todd, M. Simulation model performance analysis of a multiple station shared vehicle system.
Transp. Res. Part C 1999, 7, 237–259. [CrossRef]
12. Brook, D. Carsharing–Start Up Issues and New Operational Models. In Poceedings of the Transportation
Research Board Annual Meeting, Chicago, IL, USA, 18–20 November 2004.
13. Xu, J.X.; Lim, J.S. A new evolutionary neural network for forecasting net flow of a car sharing system. In
Proceedings of the Evolutionary Computation, Singapore, 25–28 September 2007.
14. Kek, A.G.; Cheu, R.L.; Meng, Q.; Fung, C.H. A decision support system for vehicle relocation operations in
carsharing systems. Transp. Res. Part E 2009, 45, 149–158. [CrossRef]
15. Correia, G.H.; Antunes, A.P. Optimization approach to depot location and trip selection in one-way
carsharing systems. Transp. Res. Part E 2012, 48, 233–247. [CrossRef]
16. Luè, A.; Colorni, A.; Nocerino, R.; Paruscio, V. Green move: An innovative electric vehicle-sharing system.
Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 2012, 48, 2978–2987. [CrossRef]
378
Sustainability 2016, 8, 7
17. Shaheen, S.; Cano, L.; Camel, M. Exploring Electric Vehicle Carsharing as aMobility Option for Older Adults:
A Case Study of a Senior Adult Community in the San Francisco Bay Area. Int. J. Sustain. Transp. 2015.
[CrossRef]
18. Kim, D.; Ko, J.; Park, Y. Factors affecting electric vehicle sharing program participants’ attitudes about car
ownership and program participation. Transp. Res. Part D 2015, 36, 96–106. [CrossRef]
19. Huang, Z.Y.; Yang, D.Y. The development of car sharing abroad. Urban Plan. Forum 2000, 6, 50–55.
20. Ye, L.; Yang, D.Y. The development and applied research on car sharing and mobile management in China.
In Proceedings of the China’s Sustainable Development Forum, Shandong, China, 2010; Available online:
http://cpfd.cnki.com.cn/Article/CPFDTOTAL-ZKZC201010001051.htm (accessed on 2 December 2015).
21. Gao, Y.M. Car Sharing—A new model of automobile consumption. Traffic Trans. 2005, 4, 39–40.
22. Qiu, L. Market prospects and marketing research on car sharing service in China’s. Master’s Thesis,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China, 2009.
23. Xue, Y.; Yang, T.Y.; Wen, S.B. Social Characteristics and Development Models of Car Sharing.
Techno-econ. Manag. Res. 2008, 1, 54–58.
24. Wu, W.D. Research on car sharing pattern and analysis on its development in Chinese market. Master’s
Thesis, Zhongshan University, Guangzhou, China, 2010.
25. Jing, H. The green traffic of car sharing in Hanover. Traffic Trans. 2005, 6, 13.
26. Kaixuan, X.; Mingsheng, H.; Hua, Z. The economic and ecological efficiency of car sharing service and the
feasibility to implement the service in Beijing. China Soft Sc. 2006, 12, 64–70.
27. Zhang, W.T. Advanced Courses for SPSS Statistical Analysis; Higher Education Press: Beijing, China, 2004;
pp. 189–203. (In Chinese)
28. Li, K.; Guo, Z.; Hu, L.; Xu, Y. Analysis method for ordered categorical data of cumulative score model.
Chin. J. Health Stat. 1993, 4, 35–38.
29. Hosmer, D.W.; Lemeshow, S. Applied Logistic Regression, Second ed;Wiley: New York, NY, USA, 2000.
30. Wen, X.X.; Tan, G.X.; Yao, S.S.; Huang, Z. Traffic flow characteristics and short-term prediction model of
urban intersection. J. Traffic Transp. Eng. 2006, 1, 103–107.
31. Zhou, M.J. An empirical study of factors affecting electric car purchase decision. Shanghai Auto 2013, 4,
39–44.
32. Sun, Y.; Shang, J. Factors affecting the health of residents in China: a perspective based on the living
environment. Ecol. Indic. 2015, 51, 228–236. [CrossRef]
© 2015 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
379
Article
Effects of Employees’ Work Values and
Organizational Management on Corporate
Performance for Chinese and Taiwanese
Construction Enterprises
Jeng-Wen Lin 1,*, Pu Fun Shen 2 and Yin-Sung Hsu 3
1 Department of Civil Engineering, Feng Chia University, Taichung 407, Taiwan
2 Ph.D. Program in Civil and Hydraulic Engineering, Feng Chia University, Taichung 407, Taiwan;
p0043264@fcu.edu.tw
3 Department of Water Resources Engineering and Conservation, Feng Chia University, Taichung 407, Taiwan;
yshsu@fcu.edu.tw
* Correspondence: jwlin@fcu.edu.tw; Tel.: +886-4-2451-7250 (ext. 3150); Fax: +886-4-2451-6982
Academic Editors: Adam Jabło ´ nski and Giuseppe Ioppolo
Received: 20 July 2015; Accepted: 16 December 2015; Published: 21 December 2015
Abstract: Through questionnaire surveys, this study explored the discrepancies in work values and
organizational management between employees and cadre members of construction enterprises on
the two sides of the Taiwan Strait. Statistical methods including data reliability, regression analysis,
and tests of significance were utilized for modelling a case study. The findings of this study included:
(1) in terms of work values, employees from China focused on their lives “at present”, while those
from Taiwan focused on their lives “in the future”, expecting to improve the quality of their lives
later on through advanced studies and promotion; (2) according to the data obtained from the
questionnaires, the answers regarding income and welfare in terms of work values and satisfaction
were contradictory on the two sides of the Strait, which could be interpreted in terms of influence
from society; and (3) there was a significant influence of organizational management on employees’
intentions to resign. If enterprises could improve current organizational management systems, their
employees’ work attitudes would be improved and the tendency to resign would be reduced.
Keywords: corporate performance; organizational management; questionnaire survey; test of
significance; work value
1. Introduction
Employees’ work values change from generation to generation. Understanding employees’ work
values has become a key issue for organizations aiming to achieve higher performances. Choi and Kim
recognized the individual human resource (HR) as a core asset of corporate value creation and devoted
significant effort to developing and managing competency-based HR in order to strengthen corporate
competitiveness [1]. Jia et al. addressed the concern that generational changes could be reflected in
various management aspects such as organizational structure, HR, and enterprise culture [2]. Chau
et al. indicated how to provide construction managers with information about and insight into the
existing data, so they could make decisions more effectively [3]. Park showed that the effect of resource
coverage on project performance was quantified and the policy implications were determined for
dynamic resource management by simulating the model with heuristic and industry data [4]. Scholars
in China have started to study work values of employees on either side of the Taiwan Strait. Chen
pointed out that with increasingly frequent economic and trade exchanges across the Taiwan Strait,
interdependency between Taiwan and mainland China was increasingly higher [5]. Through studies
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16836–16848; doi:10.3390/su71215852 380 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16836–16848
on cross-cultural exchange and on differences between the cultures of the two sides, it was revealed
that, although there were some empirical research achievements made on the national culture and
consumer culture of the two sides of the Taiwan Strait, reliable research about corporate culture is
lacking and needs to be conducted [5]. For example, Phua examined three things regarding whether
(1) national cultural differences influence individuals’ preferences for types of remuneration and levels
of job autonomy; (2) actual organizational human resource management (HRM) practices reflect such
preferences; and (3) gaps between individuals’ preferences and actual organizational HRM practices
affect job satisfaction [6].
1.1. Organizational Management and Corporate Performance
Many factors may influence an organization’s interests. Among them, two important ones are the
organizational management and performance of HR. Kamath’s empirical analysis found that HR was
the one factor which had a major impact on the profitability and productivity of the firms studied [7].
Though there was growing importance and efficiency in the utilization of intellectual resources in
the Indian pharmaceutical industry, its potential to impact the industry’s financial performance was
missing in the empirical analysis [7]. Kim et al. claimed that HRM had been identified as very important
for site management compared with such management at other locations [8]. Cheng et al. applied
business process reengineering and organization planning philosophy to HRM and focused on HR
planning in construction management process reengineering (CMPR) to develop a team-based HR
planning (THRP) method for deploying labor [9]. Druker et al. examined HRM practices in relation
to the role of personnel departments, line management responsibility, performance management,
and values and beliefs of personnel managers [10]. Fatimah claimed that HR improvement in an
organization played an important role in determining the success of an organization [11].
Corporate organizational management is ultimately important to corporate performance.
Rob et al. analyzed whether Japanese firms with many governance provisions had better corporate
performance than firms with few governance provisions and discovered that well-governed firms
significantly outperformed poorly governed firms by up to 15% per year [12]. Saito performed a
comparative study according to two surveys conducted in Japan and the United States to understand
how facility managers recognized and practiced universal design in their workplaces and to identify
what factors were likely to facilitate or obstruct their practice [13]. Wong et al. claimed that workplace
environment affected employees’ well-being and comfort, which in turn influenced their productivity
and morale [14]. Teizer et al. indicated that better safety and productivity could be achieved when
construction resources, including people and equipment, could be monitored [15]. The work of
Li et al. showed that the abilities of management and technology were two common factors that could
transcend different institutions and systems [16].
On the other hand, an incentive system is also essential in an organization. Pattarin et al. proposed
that employee perks were positively associated with current and future returns on assets, which
supported the view that some types of perks might increase firm profitability and/or that perks were
paid as a bonus to reward performance [17]. Findings from stratified samples suggested that perks
might incentivize managers, even after controlling for firm size, growth opportunity, and leverage [17].
Pfeffer claimed that ignoring the influences of working environments on employees’ performances
might cause organizations to lose their competitiveness [18]. Hence, more emphases have been
placed on studies of “person–organization fit” or “person–job fit”, For example, Schein indicated
that environment was an important factor for person–organization fit [19]. Schneider believed that
person–organization fit might influence one’s performance in an organization [20]. In short, HRM and
its performance practice change due to the role of values and identity change and have also become
the conceptual framework of this study.
381
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16836–16848
1.2. Issues Regarding Work Values
In recent years, many scholars have studied issues related to work values. Ralston et al. assessed
the impact of economic ideology and national culture on the individual work values of managers in the
United States, Russia, Japan, and China [21]. Reichel et al. presented evidence that work values could
be a good indicator for the selection and career development of personnel [22]. Lee and Yen explored
the connection between work values and career orientation for employees in high-tech production [23].
All organizations are unique and, thus, practice different cultural values within the organization.
In a university setting, it was discovered that leadership values have a significant impact on
university-wide cultural values, employee values, and stakeholder values [24,25]. Cultural values
considerably affect productivity values and employee values. Further, employee values have significant
influence on productivity and stakeholder values [24,25]. Scholars believed there were many aspects
of work values. For example, Wu and Chiang explored how Chinese values impacted employees’
satisfaction (ES). Taiwanese employees viewed “career planning” as the most important, while Chinese
employees thought “organizational management” was most important. For Taiwanese employees,
“salary and benefits”, “workload”, and “organizational management” had effects on ES, while age
and education were important to Chinese employees [26]. Leung et al. indicated that the construction
industry had been recognized as a stressful industry, and a great deal of stress was placed on
various construction professionals (CPs). However, due to the different “values” among CPs in
Hong Kong, susceptibility to stressors varied a great range among workers. People who grew up and
lived in different cultural environments had different values and this led to different perceptions of
stressors [27]. Ochieng et al. examined challenges faced by senior construction managers in managing
cross-cultural complexity and uncertainty [28]. Francis and Lingard claimed that societal attitudes and
work values were changing and that these changes had been reflected in the employment practices of
many construction companies [29]. Morrison and Thurnell addressed that, in order to attract and retain
valuable employees, the New Zealand construction industry must provide useful work-life benefits,
reasonable working hours, and supportive workplace cultures in line with such initiatives [30].
1.3. Prime Novelty Statements
Based on the arguments above regarding the effects of employees’ work values and organizational
management on corporate performance and based on the extension of the work by Lin et al. [31], Lin
and Shen [32], Shen [33], we proposed three novelty statements.
(1) This paper is a “case study”. It was conducted with a questionnaire survey to offer
organizations some references, in which the reliability of the data was determined based on Cronbach’s
alpha values. According to the results of this study, all the Cronbach’s alpha values from the reliability
analyses were higher than 0.7, implying that all the organizational data were highly trustworthy.
(2) This study examined the results of questionnaires regarding issues of work values and
organizational management, and compared the issues. The results clearly showed the needs and
viewpoints of employees from the two sides of the Strait, and therefore the relevant organizational
management skills that could be utilized as references.
(3) Three regression models were used to verify this study regarding the issues of work values
and organizational management. Interpretations were provided of unpredictable outcomes, so that
management could understand and compare the extent to which the employees from the two sides
of the Strait devoted themselves to their jobs, whether the employees would like to stay or leave the
enterprise, and what they thought about the welfare systems of the enterprise.
2. Analysis Methods for Questionnaires
The subjects of this study were Taiwanese and Chinese employees of branches of Taiwanese
companies in China. The differences in work values and organizational management models were
reviewed. The influences of the differences in work values and work satisfaction on organizations
382
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16836–16848
were also explored. The questionnaires were designed according to the job diagnostic survey by
Hackman and Oldham [34], proposing to (1) diagnose existing jobs so to determine whether (and
how) they might be redesigned to improve employee motivation and productivity and (2) assess the
effects of job changes on employees. The tool is based on a theory of how job design affects work
motivation and provides means of (a) individual psychological states because of these dimensions and
(b) affective reactions of employees to the working environment. The survey questionnaire focused on
the “work characteristics questionnaire”, including questions for (1) work values and (2) organizational
management. Participants used a five-point Likert Scale to answer the questionnaire.
This study analyzed the data using the software SPSS (Statistical Package for the Social Sciences).
The statistical methods adopted in this study were listed below for quantitative measures.
(1) Reliability analysis for questionnaires: Reliability indicated stability and consistency.
This study utilized Cronbach’s alpha values, whose set of criteria were proposed by Guieford [35] to
verify the reliability of the collected data. The standard value of Cronbach’s alpha was 0.5. High alpha
values (>0.7) represented high reliability and low alpha values (<0.35) meant low reliability.
(2) Descriptive statistics: They were used to describe the properties of the samples and the
averages, standard deviations, and distributions of variables for the samples.
(3) Regression analysis: By adopting multiple regression analysis, the effects of the independent
variables (work values and organizational management) on the dependent variables should be
examined with moderating variables being controlled. In addition, work values and work satisfaction
for employees from both sides of the Strait were modeled to determine their differences.
Using regression analysis, three models were established based on three most important indicators
of managing an organization, as selected from the perspectives of business managers according to the
interviews and to the works by Huang, Huang, and Tang [36–38]. The three indicators included (1)
employees’ devotion to their jobs; (2) their commitment to the organization and whether to resign; and
(3) their salaries and welfare provided by enterprises. The capabilities of the independent variables to
predict and explain the dependent variables were discussed. For employees’ devotion to their jobs,
the selected dependent variable Y was that “My boss thinks I am doing a great job at work”. Huang
believed that the more devoted employees are to their jobs, the more praises they are going to get from
their bosses [36]. For whether employees will resign, the selected dependent variable Y was the “In
order to stay employed by the company, I am willing to accept any assignment”. Huang believed
that only employees who can accept companies’ arrangements are loyal to the companies [36]. For
employees’ salaries and welfare, the selected dependent variable Y was that “I am very satisfied with
the welfare provided by the company I work for”. On the other hand, the independent variables X for
the three models were questions in the work values and organizational management questionnaires
corresponding to the selected dependent variables.
(4) Test of significance: statistical significance is a kind of evaluation metric. For example: A and
B are two sets of data with statistical significance at the 0.05 level, which indicates the possibility of the
two data sets having significant difference of 5%, or 95% probability that the two sample sets have no
difference. This 5% difference is caused by simple random sampling error. Typically, the statistical
significance achieved at the .05 or .01 level can refer to significant differences between the data sets. If P
(X = x) < p = 0.05 is significant, SPSS statistical analysis software uses * mark, while P (X = x) < p = 0.01
is considered extremely significant and is usually marked by **.
3. Results of Data Reliability, Data Validity, and Descriptive Statistics
A total amount of 250 questionnaires was handed out to Taiwanese and Chinese employees of
different ranks in the company. After precluding 30 invalid questionnaires (non-response samples)
and 69 unreturned ones, a total amount of 181 questionnaires were found to be valid. The response
rate was 72.4% as illustrated in Table 1 (adapted from Lin et al. [31]). With the data obtained from the
questionnaires, the reliability analysis was first conducted, followed by a series of statistical analyses.
383
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16836–16848
Table 1. Information regarding returned questionnaires.
Sample No. of Questionnaires
Distributed
No. of Valid
Questionnaires Response Rate
All employees 250 181 72.4%
Taiwanese employees 90 58 64%
Chinese employees 90 73 81%
Taiwanese cadre
members 50 36 72%
Chinese cadre members 20 14 70%
3.1. Reliability Analysis for Questionnaires
Reliability is the degree of consistency of results from repeated measurements of the same
population or similar populations. It represents the correctness or precision of the tools used for
measurement. In order to avoid the correctness of the collected and classified questionnaires being
influenced by the low reliabilities for the measured categories, reliability analysis was applied for each
of the categories as listed in Table 2. It shows that, in this study, all the reliabilities were greater than
0.7, implying that the collected samples were stable and satisfactorily consistent.
Table 2. Reliability analyses.
Cronbach’s Alpha Chinese Taiwanese
Work values 0.736 0.703
Organizational management 0.716 0.743
3.2. Validity Analysis for Questionnaires
Validity means “exploratory factor analysis” [31], characteristics of main features being the
following assessment, with the corresponding results listed in Table 3.
(1) Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) measure of sampling adequacy assesses whether the partial
correlations among variables are small (KMO > 0.6);
(2) Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity assesses whether the correlation matrix is an identity matrix,
indicating that the factor model is inappropriate (Sig < 0.05);
Table 3. Validity analyses.
Exploratory Factor Chinese Taiwanese
Work values KMO = 0.817 Sig = 0.000 KMO = 0.809 Sig = 0.000
Organizational management KMO = 0.738 Sig = 0.000 KMO = 0.743 Sig = 0.000
3.3. Descriptive Statistics
The research subjects of this study were employees of a company from Taiwan invested in China.
After the questionnaires were retrieved, the number of samples was obtained and the frequencies
and weighted averages of the questions were computed. From this information, how important work
values were for the employees from both sides of the Strait and their differences could be determined.
The ranking of work values for the employees from both sides of the Strait and the ranking of the
organizational management of cadre members from both sides of the Strait were summarized in
Tables 4 and 5 respectively (questionnaires adopted from [31–33]).
384
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16836–16848
Table 4. Ranking of work values of employees from both sides of the Strait.
Chinese Taiwanese
The insurance system of the
company is good. 4.79 The insurance system of the
company is good. 4.93
When I am sick, the company
takes good care of me. 4.44 When I am sick, the company takes
good care of me. 4.89
The quality of my life can be
improved through my work. 4.38 I never feel confused or scared
while working. 4.69
My own dream can be realized
at work. 4.28 There are chances for advanced
studies at work. 4.67
My life becomes richer due to
my work. 4.23 There are many chances of
promotion. 4.59
There are chances for advanced
studies at work. 4.05
I can arrange my own schedule
properly because of the flexibility of
my work.
4.37
I am proud of my work. 4.05 The quality of my life can be
improved through my work. 3.82
I devote myself to my work. 3.95 My own dream can be realized at
work. 3.67
I can arrange my own schedule
properly because of the
flexibility of my work.
3.92 My life becomes richer due to my
work. 3.55
I want to be perfect when it
comes to my work. 3.92 I want to be perfect when it comes
to my work. 3.44
There are many chances of
promotion. 3.69 I am proud of my work. 3.38
My income is higher than that of
others with the same conditions
as me.
3.49 I devote myself to my work. 3.31
Even if there is no extra pay for
working overtime, I would still
work overtime to finish my
work at night.
3.47 I can get a raise or bonus of a proper
amount. 3.07
I usually go to work earlier to
prepare the tasks I have
to handle.
3.33 The welfare system of the company
is good. 3.07
I never feel confused or scared
while working. 3.22
My income is higher than that of
others with the same conditions
as me.
3.07
I can get a raise or bonus of a
proper amount. 3.22 I usually go to work earlier to
prepare the tasks I have to handle. 2.93
The welfare system of the
company is good. 3.22
Even if there is no extra pay for
working overtime, I would still
work overtime to finish my work
at night.
2.66
385
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16836–16848
Table 5. Ranking of the organizational management of cadre members from both sides of the Strait.
Chinese Taiwanese
I think the training provided by
the company I work for can meet
the demands of the employees.
4.21
Compared with other companies
in the same field, I think the salary
and welfare offered by the
company I work for are better.
4.81
If there is a training opportunity,
the management of the company I
work for usually encourages the
employees to participate.
4.14
I think the employees’ salaries
offered by the company are
closely related to the employees’
performances at work.
4.55
The company I work for would
communicate with its employees
regarding their achievements and
offer them suggestions.
3.86
I think the training provided by
the company I work for can meet
the demands of the employees.
4.16
I think the employees’ salaries
offered by the company are
closely related to the employees’
performances at work.
3
If there is a training opportunity,
the management of the company I
work for usually encourages the
employees to participate.
4.13
Compared with other companies
in the same field, I think the salary
and welfare offered by the
company I work for are better.
2.93
The company I work for would
communicate with its employees
regarding their achievements and
offer them suggestions.
3.83
I think the employees of the
company I work for are highly
involved in decision making
at work.
2.5
I think the employees of the
company I work for are highly
involved in decision making
at work.
3.36
According to the obtained statistical values, the Chinese cadre members believed that the most
important thing was the demands of the employees, followed by the training opportunities and the
communication between the company and its employees, and the least important ones were decision
making at work, the salaries, and welfare offered by the company. On the other hand, the Taiwanese
cadre members believed that the most important thing was the salaries and welfare offered by the
company, followed by the employees’ performances at work and the demands of the employees, and
the least important ones were decision making at work and the communication between the company
and its employees.
4. Correlation and Regression Analyses
4.1. Employees’ Devotion to Their Jobs
The six variables from work values as listed in Table 6 (questions selected from [31–33]), including
(1) “I devote myself to my work”; (2) “Even if there is no extra pay for working overtime, I would still
work overtime to finish my work at night”; (3) “I usually go to work earlier to prepare the tasks I have
to handle”; (4) “I am proud of my work”; (5) “I want to be perfect when it comes to my work”; and
(6) “I never feel confused or scared while working”, were selected as the independent variables X to
explain the dependent variable Y: “My boss thinks I am doing a great job at work”. The R value was
0.709 with the Taiwanese employees and 0.791 with the Chinese employees, indicating that there was
a relationship between superintendents’ praise for the employees and the employees’ devotion to their
jobs. One explanation is that the more devoted the employees were to their jobs, the more praise they
could get from their superintendents. Hence, one of the six important indicators from work values for
selecting employees was their devotion to their jobs.
386
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16836–16848
Table 6. Employees’ devotion to their jobs from both sides of the Strait.
Independent variables (X)
1. I devote myself to my work.
2. Even if there is no extra pay for working overtime, I
would still work overtime to finish my work
at night.
3. I usually go to work earlier to prepare the tasks I
have to handle.
4. I am proud of my work.
5. I want to be perfect when it comes to my work.
6. I never feel confused or scared while working.
Dependent variable (Y) My boss thinks I am doing a great job at work.
R value with the Taiwanese employees 0.709
R value with the Chinese employees 0.791
4.2. Influence of Organizational Management on Employees’ Decisions to Resign
The five variables from organizational management as listed in Table 7 (questions selected
from [31–33]), including (1) “I think the employees of the company I work for are highly involved in
decision making at work”; (2) “If there is a training opportunity, the management of the company I
work for usually encourages the employees to participate”; (3) “I think the training provided by the
company I work for can meet the demands of the employees”; (4) “The company I work for would
communicate with its employees regarding their achievements and offer them suggestions”; and
(5) “Compared with other companies in the same field, I think the salary and welfare offered by the
company I work for are better”, were selected as the independent variables X to explain the dependent
variable Y: “In order to stay employed by the company, I am willing to accept any assignment”.
The results show that the cadre members from both sides of the Strait believed that identification with
the company and decisions to stay were highly related to the company’s organizational management.
Of course, the organizational management system could not fully interpret its employees’ decisions to
stay or whether they associated themselves with the company. However, it was a reasonable indicator
as to why some employees decided to resign.
Table 7. Influence of the organizational management on employees’ decision to resign from both sides
of the Strait.
Independent variables (X)
1. I think the employees of the company I work for
are highly involved in decision making at work.
2. If there is a training opportunity, the management
of the company I work for usually encourages the
employees to participate.
3. I think the training provided by the company I
work for can meet the demands of the employees.
4. The company I work for would communicate with
its employees regarding their achievements and offer
them suggestions.
5. Compared with other companies in the same field,
I think the salary and welfare offered by the company
I work for are better.
Dependent variable (Y)
In order to stay employed by the company, I am
willing to accept any assignment.
R value with the Taiwanese employees 0.759
R value with the Chinese employees 0.736
387
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16836–16848
4.3. Employees’ Salaries and Welfare
The five variables among work values as listed in Table 8 (questions selected from [31–33]),
including (1) “When I am sick, the company takes good care of me”; (2) “The insurance system of the
company is good”; (3) The welfare system of the company is good”; (4) My income is higher than that
of others with the same conditions as me”; and (5) “I can get a raise or bonus of a proper amount”,
were selected as the independent variables X to explain the dependent variable Y: “I am very satisfied
with the welfare provided by the company I work for”. The R values with both the Taiwanese and
Chinese employees were relatively low, implying that it was not adequate to explain the employees’
satisfaction with the company’s welfare using their work values. Such results of both sides of the Strait
are similar to the work of Huang [36]. This means that the employees were not satisfied when their
superintendents used one of their work values as standards to offer welfare, due to the fact that the
welfare satisfaction may be relevant to “the influence of social desirability” [36]. Excluded variables
in Table 8 further show that the factor “I can get a raise or bonus of a proper amount” showed a
very significant difference (p-value = 0.00) than other factors. Thus, the factor was removed and the
regression analysis was rerun once again. The consequent R values were drastically increased for the
Taiwanese and Chinese employees from 0.435–0.764 and from 0.308–0.687, respectively, as listed in
Table 9 (questions selected from [31–33]). This verifies the assumption that the welfare satisfaction may
be relevant to “the influence of social desirability”.
Table 8. Employees’ salaries and welfare on both sides of the Strait.
Independent variables
(X)
1. When I am sick, the company takes good care of me.
2. The insurance system of the company is good.
3. The welfare system of the company is good.
4. My income is higher than that of others with the same conditions as me.
5. I can get a raise or bonus of a proper amount.
Dependent variable (Y) I am very satisfied with the welfare provided by the company I work for.
R value with the
Taiwanese employees
0.435
R value with the
Chinese employees
0.308
Excluded Variables
Model Beta t Sig. Partial
Correlation
Collinearity
Statistics p-value
Tolerance
I can get a raise or bonus
of a proper amount.
. . . . 0.000 0.000
Table 9. Employees’ salaries and welfare on both sides of the Strait with a variable excluded.
Independent variables (X)
1. When I am sick, the company takes good care of
me.
2. The insurance system of the company is good.
3. The welfare system of the company is good.
4. My income is higher than that of others with the
same conditions as me.
Dependent variable (Y)
I am very satisfied with the welfare provided by the
company I work for.
R value with the Taiwanese employees 0.764
R value with the Chinese employees 0.687
5. Evaluation by Test of Significance
Analyses via the statistical significance assists in comprehending the differences in work values
and organizational management of the employees and cadres between the two sides of the Strait,
388
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16836–16848
as listed in Tables 10 and 11 (questionnaires adopted from [31–33]). Table 10, regarding the work
values of employees of both sides of the Strait, shows significant differences for the three questions:
(1) “There are many chances of promotion”; (2) “Even if there is no extra pay for working overtime, I
would still work overtime to finish my work at night”; and (3) “I never feel confused or scared while
working”. Table 11, regarding the organizational management of cadre members of both sides of the
Strait, shows significant differences for the three questions: (1) “I think the employees’ salaries offered
by the company are closely related to the employees’ performances at work”; (2) “Compared with
other companies in the same field, I think the salary and welfare offered by the company I work for
are better”; and (3) “I think the employees of the company I work for are highly involved in decision
making at work”.
Table 10. Test of significance of work values of employees of both sides of the Strait.
Work Values Chinese Taiwanese p-Value
The insurance system of the company is good. 4.79 4.93 0.082
When I am sick, the company takes good care of me. 4.44 4.89 0.057
The quality of my life can be improved through my
work. 4.38 3.82 0.044 *
My own dream can be realized at work. 4.28 3.67 0.037 *
My life becomes richer due to my work. 4.23 3.55 0.034 *
There are chances for advanced studies at work. 4.05 4.67 0.039 *
I am proud of my work. 4.05 3.38 0.032 *
I devote myself to my work. 3.95 3.31 0.036 *
I can arrange my own schedule properly because of the
flexibility of my work. 3.92 4.37 0.056
I want to be perfect when it comes to my work. 3.92 3.44 0.054
There are many chances of promotion. 3.69 4.59 0.005 **
My income is higher than that of others with the same
conditions as me. 3.49 3.07 0.058
Even if there is no extra pay for working overtime, I
would still work overtime to finish my work at night. 3.47 2.66 0.009**
I usually go to work earlier to prepare the tasks I have to
handle. 3.33 2.93 0.061
I never feel confused or scared while working. 3.22 4.69 0.000 **
I can get a raise or bonus of a proper amount. 3.22 3.07 0.081
The welfare system of the company is good. 3.22 3.07 0.082
Table 11. Test of significance of the organizational management of cadre members of both sides of
the Strait.
Organizational Management Chinese Taiwanese p-value
I think the training provided by the company I work
for can meet the demands of the employees. 4.21 4.16 0.093
If there is a training opportunity, the management of
the company I work for usually encourages the
employees to participate.
4.14 4.13 0.098
389
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16836–16848
Table 11. Cont.
Organizational Management Chinese Taiwanese p-value
The company I work for would communicate with
its employees regarding their achievements and offer
them suggestions.
3.86 3.83 0.096
I think the employees’ salaries offered by the
company are closely related to the employees’
performances at work.
3 4.55 0.000 **
Compared with other companies in the same field, I
think the salary and welfare offered by the company
I work for are better.
2.93 4.81 0.000 **
I think the employees of the company I work for are
highly involved in decision making at work. 2.5 3.36 0.007 **
Statistical significance is a kind of evaluation metric; significant is indicated by an * and extremely
significant is usually marked by **. Thus, it is clear to see the differences in work values and
organizational management of the employees and cadres between the two sides of the Strait from
Tables 10 and 11.
6. Conclusions
The conclusions of the analyses in this study are summarized, anticipating that they will offer
domestic enterprises some references when developing and implementing organizational management
strategies on both sides of the Strait.
(1) Comparative results of Chinese and Taiwanese employees:
(a) Work values: The Chinese employees valued “The quality of my life can be improved through
my work”, “My own dream can be realized at work”, and “My life becomes richer due to my work”,
which all focused on their lives “at present”. On the other hand, the Taiwanese employees valued “I
never feel confused or scared while working”, “There are chances for advanced studies at work”, and
“There are many chances of promotion”, which all focused on “the future”. From this perspective, the
Chinese employees focus on their current situation and how it can improve the quality of their lives,
while the Taiwanese employees tend toward a stable job that reflects the opportunity for promotion.
(b) Organizational management: The Chinese cadre members were satisfied with the employee
training provided by the company, while the Taiwanese cadre members thought that the salaries and
welfare offered by the company were better than other companies. In general, the Taiwanese cadre
members thought more highly of their organization’s management than their Chinese counterparts did.
It appeared that the management model used in China was similar to the one used in Taiwan, showing
that the Chinese cadre members were unable to integrate in the company completely. The Taiwanese
cadre members thought better welfare could improve employees’ performances, while the Chinese
cadre members focused on encouragement and communication.
(2) An organization should know how devoted its employees are to their jobs:
Another important indicator influencing the company’s performance was the employees’ devotion
to their jobs. When recruiting new staff, applicants’ devotion and enthusiasm for their jobs should be
tested so that the organization’s performance could be improved.
(3) An organization should pay attention to defects in its organizational management and reduce
employees’ tendency to resign:
In this study, we discovered that the influences of organizational management on employees’
tendency to resign were significant. If an enterprise could improve its current organizational
management, its employees’ work attitudes could be improved as well, and their tendency to resign
should be reduced. The interviews revealed that many enterprises in Taiwan that were invested in
China did not have well-established systems for employees’ repatriation. Those assigned to work in
390
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16836–16848
China felt uncertain about their future, and this was reflected in their performance. Besides increasing
employees’ salaries, a repatriation system should be established: this ought to entail not only allowing
staff to return to their jobs in Taiwan, but also proper in-service training for Taiwanese employees in
China so that they may remain in China for long-term development. Otherwise, it is very likely that
further salary raises would be futile in increasing employees’ commitment to an organization.
Acknowledgments: Acknowledgments: The work described in this paper comprises part of the research project
sponsored by Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan (Contract No. MOST 102-2221-E-035-049), whose
support is greatly appreciated.
Author Contributions: Author Contributions: Jeng-Wen Lin designed the research and wrote the paper; Pu Fun
Shen performed research and analyzed the data; and Yin-Sung Hsu revised the paper.
Conflicts of Interest: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Choi, J.H.; Kim, Y.S. An analysis of core competency of construction field engineer for cost management.
J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 2013, 14, 26–34. [CrossRef]
2. Jia, G.; Ni, X.; Chen, Z.; Hong, B.; Chen, Y.; Yang, F.; Lin, C. Measuring the maturity of risk management in
large-scale construction projects. Autom. Constr. 2013, 34, 56–66. [CrossRef]
3. Chau, K.W.; Cao, Y.; Anson, M.; Zhang, J. Application of data warehouse and decision support system in
construction management. Autom. Constr. 2003, 12, 213–224. [CrossRef]
4. Park, M. Model-based dynamic resource management for construction projects. Autom. Constr. 2005, 14,
585–598. [CrossRef]
5. Chen, C.-C. Comments on relevant study on corporate culture across the Taiwan Straits. Asian Soc. Sci. 2011,
7, 59–63. [CrossRef]
6. Phua, F.T. Do national cultural differences affect the nature and characteristics of HRM practices? Evidence
from Australian and Hong Kong construction firms on remuneration and job autonomy. Constr. Manag. Econ.
2012, 30, 545–556. [CrossRef]
7. Kamath, G.B. Intellectual capital and corporate performance in Indian pharmaceutical industry.
J. Intellect. Cap. 2008, 9, 684–704. [CrossRef]
8. Kim, J.H.; Cho, H.H.; Lee, U.K.; Kang, K.I. Development of a hybrid device based on infrared and
ultrasonic sensors for human resource management. In Proceedings of the 24th International Symposium on
Automation & Robotics in Construction, Kochi, India, 19–21 September 2007; pp. 111–115.
9. Cheng, M.Y.; Tsai, M.H.; Xiao, Z.W. Construction management process reengineering: Organizational human
resource planning for multiple projects. Autom. Constr. 2006, 15, 785–799. [CrossRef]
10. Druker, J.; White, G.; Hegewisch, A.; Mayne, L. Between hard and soft HRM: human resource management
in the construction industry. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 1996, 14, 405–416. [CrossRef]
11. Fatimah, P.R. The development of FFMD pyramid: Fuzzy Family Marriage Deployment as decision support
method to improve human resources performance. Qual. Quant. 2014, 48, 659–672. [CrossRef]
12. Rob, B.; Bart, F.; Rogér, O.; Alireza, T.-R. The impact of corporate governance on corporate performance:
Evidence from Japan. Pac. Basin Financ. J. 2008, 16, 236–251.
13. Saito, Y. Awareness of universal design among facility managers in Japan and the United States.
Autom. Constr. 2006, 15, 462–478. [CrossRef]
14. Wong, J.K.W.; Li, H.;Wang, S.W. Intelligent building research: A review. Autom. Constr. 2005, 14, 143–159.
[CrossRef]
15. Teizer, J.; Cheng, T.; Fang, Y. Location tracking and data visualization technology to advance construction
ironworkers’ education and training in safety and productivity. Autom. Constr. 2013, 35, 53–68. [CrossRef]
16. Li, J.; Chiang, Y.H.; Choi, T.N.; Man, K.F. Determinants of Efficiency of Contractors in Hong Kong and China:
Panel Data Model Analysis. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 2013, 9, 1211–1223. [CrossRef]
17. Pattarin, A.; Ilan, A.; Tianyu, Z. Executive perks: Compensation and corporate performance in China.
Asia Pac. J. Manag. 2009, 28, 401–425.
18. Pfeffer, J. Fighting the War for Talent is Hazardous to Your Organization’s Health. Organ. Dyn. 2001, 29,
248–259. [CrossRef]
391
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16836–16848
19. Schein, E. Organization Culture and Leadership; Jossey-Bass: San Francisco, CA, USA, 1985.
20. Schneider, B. The People Make The Place. Pers. Psychol. 1987, 40, 437–453. [CrossRef]
21. Ralston, D.A.; Holt, D.H.; Terpstra, R.H.; Yu, K.-C. The impact of national culture and economic ideology on
managerial work values: A study of the United States, Russia, Japan, and China. J. Int. Bus. Stud. 1997, 28,
177–207. [CrossRef]
22. Reichel, A.; Neumann, Y.; Pizam, A. TheWork Values and Motivational Profiles of Vocational, Collegiate,
Nonconformist, and Academic Students. Res. High. Educ. 1981, 14, 187–199. [CrossRef]
23. Lee, H.W.; Yen, K.W. A study of the relationship between work values and career orientation of employed in
the high technology industry. Qual. Quant. 2013, 47, 803–810. [CrossRef]
24. Ab Hamid, M.R.; Mustafa, Z.; Idris, F.; Abdullah, M.; Suradi, N.M.; Ismail, W.R. Multi-factor of cultural
values: a confirmatory factor analytic approach. Qual. Quant. 2013, 47, 499–513. [CrossRef]
25. Ab Hamid, M.R.B. Value-based performance excellence model for higher education institutions. Qual. Quant.
2015, 49, 1919–1944. [CrossRef]
26. Wu, C.-C.; Chiang, Y.-C. The impact on the cultural diversity to employees’ job satisfaction between mainland
China and Taiwan: A comparison of Taiwanese invested companies. Int. J. Hum. Resour. Manag. 2007, 18,
623–641. [CrossRef]
27. Leung, M.Y.; Chan, Y.S.; Chong, A.M.L. Chinese values and stressors of construction professionals in Hong
Kong. J. Constr. Eng. Manag. 2010, 136, 1289–1298. [CrossRef]
28. Ochieng, E.G.; Price, A.D.F.; Ruan, X.; Egbu, C.O.; Moore, D. The effect of cross-cultural uncertainty and
complexity within multicultural construction teams. Eng. Constr. Archit. Manag. 2013, 20, 307–324. [CrossRef]
29. Francis, V.; Lingard, H. The case for family-friendly work practices in the Australian construction industry.
Aust. J. Constr. Econ. Build. 2012, 2, 28–36. [CrossRef]
30. Morrison, E.; Thurnell, D. Employee preferences for work-life benefits in a large New Zealand construction
company. Aust. J. Constr. Econ. Build. 2012, 12, 12–25. [CrossRef]
31. Lin, J.-W.; Shen, P.F.; Lee, B.-J. Repetitive model refinement for questionnaire design improvement in
the evaluation of working characteristics in construction enterprises. Sustainability 2015, 7, 15179–15193.
[CrossRef]
32. Lin, J.-W.; Shen, P.F. Factor-analysis based questionnaire categorization method for reliability improvement
of evaluation of working conditions in construction enterprises. Struct. Eng. Mech. 2014, 51, 973–988.
[CrossRef]
33. Shen, P.F. Impact of Employees’ Work Values at Two Sides of Taiwan Straits on Corporate Performance.
Master’s Thesis, Feng Chia University, Taichung, Taiwan, July 2011.
34. Hackman, J.R.; Oldham, G.R. Development of the Job Diagnostic Survey. J. Appl. Psychol. 1975, 60, 159–170.
[CrossRef]
35. Guieford, J.P. Fundamental Statistics in Psychology and Education, 4th ed.; McGraw Hill: New York, NY,
USA, 1965.
36. Huang, G.-L. The Differences in Work Values between Enterprise Employees on both Sides of the Strait.
Paper Collection for the Differences in Work Values between Enterprise Employees on both Sides of
the Strait Seminar, Taiwan, 1994. Available online: http://readopac2.ncl.edu.tw/nclserialFront/search/
ref_book.jsp?la=ch&id=A00039972 (accessed on 18 December 2015).
37. Huang, T.C. Human Resource Management of Taiwanese Businessmen in Mainland China; Fongheh Publishing
Co.: Taipei, Taiwan, 1995.
38. Tang, S.C. Discussions of corporate culture between different business strategies—A case study of Taiwan’s
home appliance industry. Master’s Thesis, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan, July 1995.
© 2015 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
392
Article
How Firms Can Get Ideas from Users for Sustainable
Business Innovation
Chanwoo Cho and Sungjoo Lee *
Department of Industrial Engineering, Ajou University, 206Worldcup-ro, Yeongtong-gu, Suwon 16499, Korea;
cchanw@ajou.ac.kr
* Correspondence: sungjoo@ajou.ac.kr; Tel.: +82-31-219-2419
Academic Editors: Adam Jabło ´ nski and Marc A. Rosen
Received: 3 October 2015; Accepted: 27 November 2015; Published: 3 December 2015
Abstract: The importance of user information and user participation for seeking business
opportunities has been widely acknowledged in a variety of industries. Therefore, this study aims
to suggest a typology for user innovation models as a strategy for sustainable development and to
investigate the characteristics of different types user innovation to encourage and support improved
utilization of user innovation in firms. For this purpose, we began by collecting 435 relevant papers
from the most-cited academic journals. Then, we developed a typology of user innovation models,
which consist of four types including workshop-based, consortium-based, crowdsourcing-based and
platform-based, and we investigated the characteristics of the suggested types in terms of applications
and research trends. The analysis results reveal that each type has different characteristics and that
there exist some research gaps in the user innovation field. Our results are expected to foster
understanding of user innovation for guiding sustainable business development and provide useful
information for both researchers and innovation mangers.
Keywords: user innovation; typology; sustainable business; business innovation; innovation model;
research trends
1. Introduction
The technological environment has changed rapidly in the past decade, and technological
convergence has occurred across a diverse range of technologies. These changes have prompted
companies to seek out and cooperate with external partners, such as government officials, research
organizations and other firms in order to strengthen their capabilities and have increased the necessity
for firms to engage in strategic planning in order to survive in the market. Paying attention to customers’
diverse requirements for new products and services has become one of the essential factors for firms’
survival, highlighting the user as a firm’s principal external partner for developing sustainable business
models. Corporate sustainability can be defined as meeting the needs of a firm’s stakeholders such
as employees, customers and communities [1], by transposing the idea of sustainable development
to the firm level [2]. Considering that users are one of the most significant stakeholders, firms need
to understand users’ needs accurately and reflect these needs within their innovation processes for
developing sustainable business models. Thus, it has been critical for a firm to incorporate users’
needs, ideas and feedbacks in innovation for its sustainable growth.
For decades, firms have investigated user behaviors [3,4], and users have been recognized as a
source of innovation [5–7], suggesting innovative ideas or creating prototypes of innovative products
that organizations can utilize in their new product development (NPD) processes and develop new
business models [8,9]. A great deal of relevant research has been conducted on diverse cases of user
innovation in practice. Earlier studies focused on the analysis of users’ role in innovation [9–13], a
comparison of user innovation with supplier-driven innovation [14], and an exploration of a suitable
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059; doi:10.3390/su71215802 393 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
form of governance for user innovation [15]. Similarly, recent studies have dealt with topics such as the
analysis of users’ roles as innovators in specific industries [16,17] and interactions between users and
manufacturers [18]. At the same time, changes in user innovation have been significantly discussed
in previous studies by analyzing interactions among users [19–21] and providing suggestions for the
ways in which firms can utilize user communities and crowd sourcing [22–24] for innovation.
Although these studies have examined aspects of user innovation and helped to establish relevant
theories, there is a need for further studies. First, most of the empirical research has focused on one or a
few cases of user innovation in specific industries. There exist many different types of user innovation
in the various industries. Thus, it is essential to investigate the characteristics of each type in order to
fully understand user innovation as an approach to designing sustainable business models.
Second, although much research has suggested types of user innovation, most of them were
user-initiated cases. As reported by existing studies, there exist a lot of user innovation cases that
were initiated by firms. Moreover, business model innovation is more closely related to firm-initiated
cases rather than user-initiate cases. In diverse industries, firms have tried to collect user information,
knowledge and ideas to seek solutions to problems or to create innovation and business opportunities.
Thus, it is time to suggest types of user innovation from the firm perspective to support and foster
user innovation in firms.
Third, there is a lack of studies on the overall research trends in user innovation. User innovation
has spread widely to industries, and various types of user innovation have been suggested over time.
A clear understanding of its evolution is a prerequisite for the better utilization of user innovation in
practice. Although past research can enhance our understanding of user innovation, it is not easy to
understand the changes in user innovation. To address this issue, it would be meaningful to investigate
past and emerging user innovation models by analyzing patterns in user innovation research.
Therefore, this study aims to suggest a typology of user innovation models and investigate
them to encourage and support the better utilization of user innovation in firms as a method to find
sustainable business opportunities. For this purpose, first, we collected publications on user innovation
from the top 25 most-cited journals in the technology and innovation management area. Second, we
identified the user innovation context by developing an analysis strategy and a typology of user
innovation models. Third, we derived four types of user innovation models according to a typology,
and investigated the characteristics of each type in terms of the context of applications, research trends
and sustainable business models. Finally, we tried to find implications and research gaps in the user
innovation field in order to propose future research directions, especially for the purpose of business
model innovation for sustainability. The research findings are expected to enhance the understanding
of user innovation and help in the utilization of user innovation in firms for their sustainable growth.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we review existing studies of user
innovation and sustainable business models. In Section 3, we explain the overall research process and
the detailed processes of this study. We describe the data collection process in Section 4 and discuss
the typology of user innovation models in Section 5. In Section 6, we investigate the characteristics of
each type of user innovation model based on the data. In Section 7, the implications, research gaps
and future research directions are explained. Finally, in Section 6, we present the contributions and
limitations of the current study.
2. Background
This study proposes a typology of user innovation models and investigates the characteristics
of the various types. To this end, we must first define the concept of user innovation models and the
criteria of a typology. Therefore, this section reviews the literature on innovation models, which can
provide a basis for defining user innovation models.
394
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
2.1. User Innovation Models
An innovation model is a framework for understanding the relationship between technology,
science, and economics [25]. Based on the relationship, types of innovation models are defined. For
example, Rothwell [26] suggested five generations of innovation process models. Chesbrough [27]
suggested the concept of an open innovation model. In this model, internal R & D using external
resources that were acquired through cooperation with external partners is crucial. User innovation is
similar to the open innovation model in that the sharing of knowledge and information by interactions
and co-operation between actors plays an important role in innovation. Meanwhile, it is different from
the open innovation model in that its main actors consist of users, firms, or facilitating organizations
(intermediary firms, NGOs, universities, research funding agencies and governmental agencies). Further,
interactions and co-operation between users or user and firm are the principal sources of innovative
ideas. To better use open innovation, firms should not only adopt information and knowledge
from external partners, but also freely reveal their own information and knowledge to the public.
However, openness generally conflicts with firms’ need to protect their intellectual property [28]. User
innovation overcomes these limitations of open innovation and, therefore, has received much interest
from both industry and academia. However, it is not easy to define a “single” general user innovation
model because the characteristics of user innovation differ in each case of user innovation. Therefore,
this research examines cases of user innovation from past studies and suggests a typology of user
innovation models.
Most relevant research in user innovation has been conducted on actual cases, and such research
has yielded insights into several aspects of user innovation. Among them, how innovation outputs
are used and for whom are one of the most significant factors to define types of user innovations,
considering that the ultimate goal of innovation is to create value for the company, the users, and the
deliverable itself. In this vein, user innovation types can be grouped into three categories by innovation
initiators—user-initiated innovation, firm-initiated innovation, and intermediary-initiated innovation.
The existing literature tended to focus on user-initiated innovation. A representative case is
that of the user-innovator [29,30]. Though innovation outputs acquired through user innovation are
objects of commercialization, they can be a means to satisfy users’ needs. User-innovators develop
their ideas to fulfill their own needs [31–34], and share and diffuse their resulting innovations freely
to other users [29]. In several industries, such as rodeo kayaks [35,36], kite surfing equipment [30],
motorcycles [37], computer games [38] and sports-related consumer products [29], user-innovators
developed a novel product and launched it to the market. In these cases, user-innovators became user
manufacturers who led the overall innovation processes from idea generation to commercialization.
However, as new types of user innovation tools such as crowdsourcing, open-source software,
and a user toolkit have been suggested to assist firms in idea gathering from users, firm-initiated user
innovation has started to prevail in diverse industries. A lot of firms in software industries prefer to
use open source software as a platform to grab users’ ideas [39–41]. User toolkits have been used to
make users self-design their own product, and firms adopt users’ ideas to develop new products or
services in computer game [42], ski [43], and watch industries [44].
Recently, cases of user innovation led by facilitating organizations such as intermediary firms,
NGOs, universities, research funding agencies, and governmental agencies have been reported. In
these cases, intermediary firms facilitate the bringing together of users and firms to make innovative
products. InnoCentive [45], TopCoder [46], and direct firm solicitation of innovation by Procter and
Gamble [47] are good examples.
Since the concept of user innovation has come to prominence, diverse types of user innovation
initiated by different actors have been reported. Thus, these types should be considered in the process
of developing a typology of user innovation models. Among the three types, we restrict our focus
to the second type, which is worth investigating because more firms are required to innovate their
product and service offerings in collaboration with potential users in the era of open innovation.
395
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
2.2. User Innovation for Designing Sustainable Business Models
With global development and as associated resource use has been accelerated, it seems apparent
that business as usual is not an option for a sustainable future [48]. Firms have to create value by
seizing business opportunities, deliver an economic value to customers, and provide ecological and/or
social value to the public for their continuous growth. Emphasizing the importance of business as
a driver of innovation, previous studies suggested that a business model is a useful framework for
corporate innovation [49–51], and business model innovation is a key to success of firms [52,53].
However, long-run sustainability needs clear understanding about economic, environmental and social
factors of sustainability [54] and may require radical, fundamental and difficult changes in corporate
business models [55].
The business model is the rationale of how an organization creates, delivers, and captures value
and can be described through nine building blocks: (1) customer segments; (2) value proposition;
(3) channels; (4) customer relationships; (5) revenue streams; (6) key resources; (7) key activities;
(8) partner network; and (9) cost structure [56]. In particular, a “sustainable” business model is defined
as a business model that creates competitive advantage through superior customer value as well
as contributes to sustainable development of the company and society [52]. To build a sustainable
business model, firms have to transform their business models towards creating positive impacts
or reduce negative impacts for the environment and society. This business model innovation for
sustainability is realized by changing the way of firms’ value network creation, value capture and
delivery, and value proposition [48]. Hence, firms have to generate new sources of profit by finding
novel value proposition and value constellation combinations for developing sustainable business
models [57].
Users, as major customers, can be valuable sources in developing sustainable business models.
Stubbs and Cocklin [50] asserted that sustainable business models must develop internal structural
and cultural capabilities to achieve firm-level sustainability and collaborate with key stakeholders
to achieve sustainability for the system that a firm is part of. Here, one of the major stakeholders is
users. They reveal who the key customers are and what values they want to have. In addition, they are
willing to develop and even offer their own innovation ideas to firms. In a similar vein, Osterwalder
and Pigneur [56] also emphasized the significance of users for business model development by arguing
that customer segments, customer relationships and channels should be aligned, considering potential
trade-offs, to conceptualize an effective business model. By adopting user innovation that consists of
user-own information and knowledge, therefore, firms can generate a novel value proposition, leading
to sustainable business model innovation. Here, it should be noted that business model innovation is
not just changing the product and service offerings for the customer. It involves changing “the way of
business”, rather than “what firms do” and must go beyond process and products [58].
Accordingly, business model innovation for sustainability should be pursued from the perspective
of sociotechnical systems, not in terms of the technical system. Quite naturally, the role of users
as sources of innovative ideas for sustainable business models should also be analyzed within
the framework of sociotechnical systems. For example, in the case of living labs, users shape the
innovation in their own real-life environments, unlike the traditional approaches to users where the
insights of users were captured and interpreted by experts [59]. Innovation occurs in value network
constellations and users play a significant role. This notion indicates that it is worth investigating
the role of users in the process of business model innovation, which is expected to help facilitate the
adoption of user innovation models by firms for designing sustainable business models.
3. Overall Research Processes
The overall research process of this study is shown in Figure 1. First, we collected relevant
papers on user innovation from online academic journals. Second, we identified a user innovation
context based on collected papers. Here, we adopted the 5W1H (i.e., who, when, where, what, why,
how) method to develop an analysis strategy and a typology of user innovation models. Third,
396
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
we investigated user innovation types. The context of applications and the research trends of each type
were analyzed. At last, we derived implications and future research trends based on the analysis results.
Figure 1. Overall research process.
3.1. Step 1: Collect Data for Analysis
3.1.1. Develop a Search Strategy
We collected papers published between 1976 and 2015 from the top 25 most-cited technology
and innovation management journals that were mentioned in past studies [60,61]. We used “user
innovation” and “user-innovation” as the initial search keywords. All of the publications that include
the term “user innovation” or “user-innovation” in the title, abstract, or keywords were collected. The
initial keywords were too simple in order to search for sufficient amounts of relevant publications,
so we tried to analyze the author keywords of collected publications to extend the search terms.
Keywords which have been used more frequently than others were selected; then, among them,
meaningful keywords in the user innovation context were chosen to extend the search keywords
set (see Table 1). The extended keyword set includes “open source software”, “user community”,
“co-creation”, “crowdsourcing”, “user design”, “self design”, “user toolkit” and “lead user”. These
are the top eight keywords most frequently appearing as keywords in the papers obtained by our
initial search.
Table 1. Extended keywords set.
Keywords Number of Publications Search Term
Open source software 4 “open source software”, “open-source software”
User community 8 “user community”, “user-community”
User toolkit 6 “user toolkit”, “user-toolkit”
Lead user 3 “lead user”, “lead-user”
Co-creation 2 “cocreation”, “co-creation”
Crowdsourcing 2 “crowdsourcing”, “crowd-sourcing”
User design 2 “user design”, “user-design”
Self design 2 “self design”, “self-design”
397
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
3.1.2. Construct a Database for Analysis
The collected publications were screened to construct a database for analysis. In order to identify
the user innovation context, publications that described a theoretical approach without a concrete
mention of user innovation cases or processes were excluded.
3.2. Step 2: Identify User Innovation Context
3.2.1. Develop an Analysis Strategy
To identify the user innovation context, we first developed an analysis strategy by adopting the
5W1H method, and the results of using this method to find out how firms get ideas from users are
presented in Table 2.
Table 2. 5W1H: how firms get ideas from users.
5W1H How Firms Get Ideas from Users
Who Types of users
Where Types of industries
What Innovation ideas—types of problems
When Firms’ innovation processes
Why Firms’ purposes of getting information
How Types of tools firms utilize to get information from users
3.2.2. Develop a Typology of User Innovation Models
According to the types of initiators—user, firm, and facilitating organizations—user innovation
models can be distinguished. Hence, a typology of user innovation models has to cover those diverse
types. However, because the current study investigates user innovation from the firm perspective, the
suggested typology just covers firm-initiated user innovation models. We regarded the motivation
of firms initiating innovation as the most important aspect of firm-initiated user innovation. They
correspond to “what” and “why” in Table 1. Thus, we defined the “purpose of getting ideas” (“why”
firms start to get ideas) and the “types of problems” (“what” problems are they dealing with) as the
criteria of a typology. Accordingly four type of innovation models can be identified from a two-by-two
matrix. We also attempted to assign types of tools (“how” firms get ideas from users) to each type of
user innovation model, which is also significant for firms in order to implement user-driven innovation.
3.3. Step 3: Investigate Types of User Innovation Models
The four types of suggested user innovation models were analyzed in terms of the context of
applications and the research trends. The analysis results provide information about “who,” “where,”
and “how” in the user innovation context. The criteria “when” was removed from our analysis because
relatively little information about when user ideas were utilized during the innovation process was
provided in the papers. In addition, innovation processes are so diverse across firms that it is infeasible
to define a standard innovation process, which is a preliminary procedure for our analysis.
3.3.1. Analyze the Context of Applications
To investigate “who,” “where,” and “how” in the user innovation context, the kinds of users,
industry, and tools in each type were analyzed. Particularly, the industry is worth investigating
because user innovation may not be appropriate for all industries. Many researchers regarded users as
product developers who contribute to innovation [9] in the semiconductor [12], scientific instrument [7],
and machine tool industries [11]. However, different industries many need different types of user
innovation models. For the analysis, we adopted the International Standard Industrial Classification
398
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
(ISIC) to clearly distinguish the types of industry and we standardized the types of users based on the
existing studies (see Table 3).
Table 3. Types of users.
Types of Users Definitions
General users Individuals or groups who use or may use a product/service from a target firm
Expert users Users who own technical skills and knowledge
Lead users Users who experienced needs still unknown to general users
Innovative users Users who self-developed an innovation for their own needs
User community A group of users
3.3.2. Analyze the Research Trends
To investigate the research trends for each type of user innovation model, the annual number of
publications was analyzed and the keywords that were frequently used in pairs were extracted from
abstracts of publications. To extract keywords, a text-mining tool, TextAnalyst, was used.
4. Data Collection
As a result of the initial search, 140 publications were collected. By investigating the author
keywords of 140 collected publications, an extended keywords set that consists of eight terms was
defined as shown in Table 3. Using the extended keywords set, an additional 295 publications
were collected.
Consequently, a total of 435 publications were collected from 25 journals. The annual number of
publications from 1976–2015 was stable at one to two before 2000, but it has rapidly increased since
then (See Figure 2). We screened 435 collected papers to construct a database for analysis. After the
screening, 149 publications on user innovation were chosen for our analysis (see Appendix 1).
Figure 2. The annual number of collected publications (1976–July 2015).
5. Types of User Innovation Models
To derive the types of user innovation models, we first define the levels of the criteria. Firms may
utilize users’ innovation ideas to seek solutions for problems or to co-create innovation with users
based on user-own information or knowledge.
399
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
Hence, the first criterion, “purpose of getting ideas,” consists of two levels: idea adoption and idea
co-creation. In the former case, interactions between firms and users are likely to be one-directional;
users transfer their innovation ideas to a firm while firms try to capture ideas from users. Whereas, in
the latter case, relationships between firms and users are interactional; discussions and feedback may be
developed between firms and users to co-create innovation ideas. User–firm interactions and user–user
interactions have been recognized as factors affecting innovation performance [6]. Particularly, it was
discovered that user–firm interactions reduce the uncertainty of innovation, and this is linked to the
successful commercialization of new products or services [18]. As was mentioned above, there are two
types of user–firm interactions: one-directional, such as innovation contests [62,63], and interactional,
such as direct user involvement in a firm’s innovation process [64–66]. The interaction can also happen
between users. User–user interactions enable the diffusion of knowledge, information, and experience
that individual users own, and encourage user innovation [67]. However, as the focus of this study is
firm-initiated user innovation, only the user–firm interactions are considered for further analysis.
The second criterion, “types of problems,” consists of two levels: a given problem and an open
problem. Firms may adopt user ideas to solve a pre-defined problem, for example, finding a way
to improve a particular function of their products/services, which is the former case. Actually, lead
users own much of the solution knowledge about specific problems, and thus, they frequently play
a key role in the creation of knowledge [68]. On the other hand, firms may utilize user ideas to
handle an open-ended problem, for example, exploring all possible ways to improve their existing
product/services. These are the two most critical factors that will affect the way firms adopt
user innovation.
According to the criteria of a typology, four types of firm-initiated user innovation models are
derived (see Figure 3). We named the four types that were derived by considering the available types
of tools for getting ideas, information, and knowledge for each type, focusing on the most frequently
used ones.
Figure 3. Four types of user innovation models.
At first, in the case of type 1, firms can organize user-involved workshops to seek solutions
for problems by cooperating with users. Thus, the name “workshop-based” was given to this type.
Second, in the case of type 2, firms generally co-work with users who possess technical knowledge,
such as experts, technicians and professional users to determine some problems and to co-create
novel innovation. Hence, the name “consortium-based” was assigned to this type. Third, when firms
want to seek solutions for given problems, they tend to crowdsource innovation ideas by using idea
400
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
competition or contest. Thus, this type was named “crowdsourcing-based”. At last, in the case of
type 4, firms are likely to develop online or offline platforms that are open to users for the purpose of
problem-seeking. This case was called “platform-based”.
After the designation, we assigned 149 publications to each type. The result is shown in Table 4.
Among 149 publications, 57 were assigned to the “platform-based” category, 36 to the “workshop-based”
type, 21 to the “crowdsourcing-based” format, and seven to the “consortium-based” type. The other
28 publications were not assigned to any of the four types because they addressed user innovation
cases in which the innovation initiators were not firms.
Table 4. The number of assigned publications to each type of user innovation models.
Types of User Innovation Models The Number of Publications
Workshop-based 36
Consortium-based 7
Crowdsourcing-based 21
Platform-based 57
Others 28
Total 149
6. Characteristics of User Innovation Models
6.1. The Context of Applications
The analysis results of the context of applications for each type of user innovation model are
as follows.
Firstly, the results for the “workshop-based” type are shown in Table 5. In this type, firms generally
got ideas from general or lead users; the workshop, lead user method, user research interviews,
surveys, and group research are the main types of tools. This type has occurred in diverse sectors such
as the manufacturing, information and communication, and many service industries. The results mean
that because this type utilizes relatively basic and traditional tools, it has widely spread to a diverse
range of industries. The firms in this type must determine solutions based on user-owned information
and knowledge; thus, they seem to prefer selected users to large groups of people, such as the user
community, for their purposes. Figure 4 depicts the model for this type.
Next, the results for the “consortium-based” type are shown in Table 6. In this type, firms generally
got ideas from expert users via collaboration. Firms in professional, scientific, and technical activities
industries prefer this type. The purpose of a consortium is to explore ideas to find out potential
problems and solutions for them. Thus, expert users who possess technical knowledge and skills seem
to be preferred. Figure 5 depicts the model of this type.
The results for the “crowdsourcing-based” type are shown in Table 7. In this type, general users
and the user community are the main types of users and crowdsourcing and idea competition are
primarily used as tools for getting ideas. Firms in manufacturing, such as the computer, automotive,
and information and communication industries, prefer this type. In this type, crowdsourcing or idea
competition for the design of products (e.g., the design of sporting goods, jewellery, and baby products)
are frequently used as the main tools. Thus, general users or the user community are preferred.
However, some cases of idea competition which focused on a lead or expert users also appeared.
Figure 6 depicts the model of this type.
401
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
Table 5. Characteristics of types of user innovation models: workshop-based.
The Number of Cases
Types of users
General users 18 (45.0%)
Lead users 16 (40.0%)
Expert users 2 (5.0%)
Innovative users -
User community -
Types of industry
Manufacturing 21 (52.5%)
Information and communication 7 (17.5%)
Professional, scientific, and technical activities 4 (10.0%)
Financial and insurance activities 2 (5.0%)
Wholesale and retail trade 1 (2.5%)
Administrative and support service activities 1 (2.5%)
Types of tools
Workshop (customer participation, user involvement) 11 (27.5%)
Others (repertory grid, skepticism-identification, casemap) 11 (27.5%)
Lead user method 9 (17.5%)
User research (interview, survey, group research) 4 (10.0%)
Figure 4. Innovation model: “workshop-based” type.
Table 6. Characteristics of types of user innovation models: consortium-based.
The Number of Cases
Types of users
Expert users 5 (75.4%)
Lead users 1 (14.3%)
General users 1 (14.3%)
Innovative users -
User community -
Types of industry
Professional, scientific, and technical activities 4 (57.1%)
Information and communication 2 (28.6%)
Manufacturing 1 (14.3%)
Types of tools
Collaboration (co-development, co-invention) 5 (83.3%)
Living lab 1 (16.7%)
402
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
Figure 5. Innovation model: “consortium-based” type.
Table 7. Characteristics of types of user innovation models: crowdsourcing-based.
The Number of Cases
Types of users
General users 11 (50.0%)
User community 6 (27.3%)
Innovative users 2 (9.1%)
Lead users 1 (4.5%)
Expert users 1 (4.5%)
Types of industry
Manufacturing 13 (59.1%)
Information and communication 6 (27.3%)
Financial and insurance activities 1 (4.5%)
Construction 1 (4.5%)
Types of tools
Crowdsourcing 9 (83.3%)
Competitions (idea contest, idea competition) 8 (16.7%)
Open platform 1 (4.5%)
Lead user method 1 (4.5%)
Figure 6. Innovation model: “crowdsourcing-based” type.
403
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
At last, the results for the “platform-based” type are shown in Table 8. In this type, firms generally
acquire ideas from general users and the user community by using an open platform, such as an
open-source software and online community or user toolkits. Thus, firms in the software industry that
use open-source software and manufacturing firms that provide users with toolkits both prefer this
type. Figure 7 depicts the model of this type.
Table 8. Characteristics of types of user innovation models: platform-based.
The Number of Cases
Types of users
User community 21 (37.5%)
General users 20 (35.7%)
Expert users 7 (12.5%)
Innovative users 5 (8.9%)
lead users 4 (7.1%)
Types of industry
Information and communication 30 (53.6%)
Manufacturing 24 (42.9%)
Professional, scientific, and technical activities 3 (5.4%)
Human health and social work activities 1 (1.8%)
Types of tools
Open platform (open source software) 24 (42.9%)
User toolkit 13 (23.2%)
Online community 10 (17.9%)
Virtual worlds 3 (5.4%)
Crowdsourcing 2 (3.6%)
Figure 7. Innovation model: “platform-based” type.
6.2. The Research Trends
The research trends for the types of user innovation models are as follows: First, the trends of
publications for the four types are shown in Table 9. The number of publications in the “workshop-based”
type has consistently increased since 1986. Since this type is relatively traditional, relevant research
seems to be published earlier than other types. The number of publications in the “platform-based”
type has rapidly increased since 2003. This may be affected by the special issue on open-source
software that was published in 2003 (Research Policy) and 2006 (Management Science). The number of
404
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
publications in the “crowdsourcing-based” type shows increasing trends since 2010, which means that
crowdsourcing is one of the recent hot topics within the user innovation field. The top five papers with
the largest number of citations in each type are listed in Appendix 2.
Table 9. The research trends: the number of publications.
Year Workshop-Based Consortium-Based Crowdsourcing-Based Platform-Based
1977
1985 1
1986 1
1988 1
1993 1
1999 1
2000
2001 1 1
2002 1 1 1
2003 2 7
2004 3 1
2005 4
2006 1 1 7
2007 1 1
2008 3 1 4
2009 4 1 4
2010 1 1 2
2011 1 4 3
2012 6 4 3
2013 6 1 3 6
2014 6 2 4 9
2015 2 1 2 3
Next, the keywords for the four types that we extracted are shown in Table 10. In the
“workshop-based” type, judging from pairs of keywords such as “product-user,” “user-idea,” and
“user-knowledge,” we can infer that firms in this type usually get ideas or knowledge from
people who use their products. In the “consortium-based” type, pairs of keywords such as
“collaborative-prototyping,” “problem-prototyping,” and “user-collaboration” show that the main
characteristics of this type is a collaboration of firms and users to derive some prototypes. In the
“crowdsourcing-based” type, pairs of keywords such as “user-crowdsourcing,” “idea-crowdsourcing,”
and “user-competition” show the main types of tools in this type. In the “platform-based”
type, “user-community,” “user-toolkit,” “software-community,” and “source-software” indicate the
frequently used tools and the main kinds of users of this type. A time-series analysis was also
conducted but it offered few meaningful implications, indicating that the research focus has remained
largely the same in each category when judged by keywords.
Table 10. The research trends: a pair of keywords in abstracts.
Workshop-Based Consortium-Based Crowdsourcing-Based Platform-Based
Product-development Product-innovation Idea-competition User-community
Product-user Collaborative-prototyping Idea-generation (Open)Source-software
(lead) user-method Product-user User-idea User-product
User-idea Problem-prototyping Product-idea User-toolkit
User-development User-collaboration User-crowdsourcing Product-community
Product-idea Idea-crowdsourcing Innovation-community
Product-concept User-competition Software-community
User-knowledge User-development
Professional-user
Expert-user
Product-development
405
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
6.3. Consortium-Based User Innovation for Sustainable Business Models
For designing sustainable business models, one of the key challenges is to enable a firm to gain
economic value for itself through delivering social and environmental benefits [69]. In addition,
many researchers argue that considering social practices is of importance for making changes
to existing routines and lifestyles to more appropriate ones for sustainability purposes [70–72].
A consortium-based innovation can be one of the ways to tackle these challenges by taking a
sociotechnical approach to developing sustainable business models.
Living labs are an emerging and representative approach to consortium-based user innovation.
Being characterized by openness and user involvement, this approach requires firms to consider
ideas stemming from external sources in the innovation processes, particularly those from users [73].
It stresses the central role of the user and users are active participants. Thus, the living labs
approach is regarded as a method of innovation, a collection of open innovation tools and networks,
experimentation platforms, and a tool for user involvement from the sociotechnical perspective. For
example, Liedtke et al. [74] introduce the sustainable living lab research infrastructure as an example of
a setting for socio-technical experiments in product-service-systems. Other researchers have focused
on living labs as a tool for research and governance [75,76], for solving social problems [77], or for
social innovation [78].
In our analysis, the living lab was used as a tool for user innovation in a “consortium-based”
type (see Table 6). However, there are few papers having both keywords “user innovation” and
“Living lab(s)” in the top 25 most-cited innovation journals, possibly because the living lab research
is building its own research streams. Actually, we could find more living lab papers published in
other journals than our target innovation journals. About 303 publications are retrieved by searching
on GoogleScholar using “living lab” and “user innovation” as searching keywords. These studies
were conducted to suggest a framework to fertilize user innovation by using a living lab [79,80],
explore user innovation in living labs [81], seek out affecting factors of user participation in living
lab field trials [82], and explore differences between several test methods for user involvement in a
living lab context [83]. User innovation studies, adopting a living lab approach, have been conducted
sporadically. Investigating these studies in detail will provide meaningful implications for developing
sustainable business models.
7. Implications and Future Research Directions
Several implications that can be derived from the analysis and future research possibilities are
discussed here. First, the number of studies about the “consortium-based” type is relatively small.
Recently, research about living lab, a representative approach for a “consortium-based” type, has been
actively conducted in practice and academia. Seeking new innovation ideas in a consortium enables to
change a firm’s business models from the perspective of industrial eco-systems and not within the
firm. Therefore, it may be valuable to study the “consortium-based” type in the future; for instance, how
a living lab approach can be utilized to facilitate user innovation in the context of innovation studies.
Among 149 publications on user innovation (see Appendix 1), we could find only one relevant paper,
which uses the keyword “living lab” in its abstract. Though most of the living lab research is expected
to be published in other journals, more discussions would be needed in the innovation journals.
Second, the user community has hardly been utilized for idea co-creation; however, it has widely
been utilized for idea adoption. It is possible that the user community possesses plenty of useful
information and knowledge for the development of products, technology and service if it is comprised
of lead or expert users. Thus, if firms establish a workshop or a consortium with a user community,
then there exists a possibility that firms can get useful ideas for new business development. Therefore,
it is worthwhile to study a potentiality of the user community as a cooperation partner for idea
adoption in firms.
Third, service firms have seldom utilized crowdsourcing or an open platform. In a “workshop-based”
type, firms in service industries (e.g., the financial, insurance, and mobile telephone sectors) have
406
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
held workshops to obtain ideas from users. In contrast to the “workshop-based” type, in the
“crowdsourcing-based” and “platform-based” types, just a few firms in service industries have adopted
ideas from users. Service quality is influenced by firm–user interactions, meaning that user innovation
is significant for sustainable business development not only in manufacturing fields but also service
fields. Hence, the way in which firms adopted users’ ideas to seek out solutions or problems can be a
valuable research subject in future studies.
Finally, there exists a lack of studies on the intermediated user innovation, though we restricted
our focus to firm-initiated user innovation. Most of the existing studies tended to link user innovator
roles mainly to organizational tasks by restricting their focus to innovation processes taking place
inside the firm. However, the recent trend towards openness brings about new inter actor tasks
between the organizations and individuals participating in open innovation, where the role of the
intermediary to facilitate or manage these emerging tasks would emphasized. Of course, we could find
a few user innovation cases led by intermediaries that support cooperation between firms and users
but relevant research has hardly been conducted. Intermediated user innovation led by intermediaries
can be a good alternative for firm-initiated or user-led innovation, and the characteristics of this type
of user innovation may be valuable to analyze. That is, using an intermediary can be another option
for seeking new business ideas. Therefore, in future studies, research on the intermediaries of user
innovation must be conducted.
8. Conclusions
Users can be a valuable source for new business development. This study aims to suggest a
typology of user innovation models that can encourage and support utilization of user innovation for
seeking new business opportunities and further designing sustainable business models based on the
opportunities. We retrieved relevant papers from the 25 most-cited journals in the technology and
innovation management field and adopted a 5W1H method to develop an analysis strategy and a
typology of user innovation models. Four types of user innovation models were derived according to
a suggested typology, and the characteristics of each type of user innovation model were investigated
in terms of applications and research trends. As a result of the study, we found that each type of user
innovation model prevailed in different industries, and firms of each type utilized different tools to
adopt ideas, information and knowledge from various kinds of users. We determined that there are
some research gaps and suggest future research directions to achieve user innovation for sustainable
business growth.
This study contributes to future research in two ways: First, our results on a typology of user
innovation model and analysis results for each type can provide useful information to the decision
makers of firms that want to get ideas from users for their new business development. For example,
firms that want to get ideas from users in specific industries can acquire information about which
types of users and tools are suitable for their purposes. Second, we identified gaps on user innovation
research and suggest directions for future study. Although there exist many studies on user innovation,
research on trends of user innovation has not been conducted. The results of research trends enhance
our understanding of user innovation studies and future research directions can encourage further
studies on user innovation as a meaningful approach to business innovation.
Although this study has made meaningful contributions, it also has some limitations. First, it
only focuses on firm-initiated user innovation. Since a proposed typology covers only firm-initiated
user innovation, it is not a complete one. In addition, our typology for user innovation models was
developed completely according to literature on the assumption that frequently used innovation
models are often studied in academia and, thus, may not coincide with the reality of user innovation in
the field. Second, more in-depth trends analysis needs to be carried out because this study investigated
only the number of papers in each type of user innovation model. However, more meaningful
implications can be derived from time-series analysis on types of users, industries, or tools in each type.
Finally, there is still room for further improvements in data collection. The data source for analysis was
407
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
restricted to the 25 most-cited journals in the technology and innovation management field. However,
user innovation is a multi-disciplinary research field, and there may exist relevant papers in other
fields. Hence, future research will address these issues.
Acknowledgments: Acknowledgments: This work was partially supported by the National Research Foundation
of Korea (NRF) grant founded by the Korea government (NRF-2013R1A2A2A03016904, 2014S1A5A2A03065010).
Author Contributions: Author Contributions: Cho, C. and Lee, S. conceived and designed the research; Cho, C.
performed the research and analyzed the data; Lee, S. supervised the research; Cho, C. wrote the paper.
Conflicts of Interest: Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Appendix
Appendix 1. The List of the Top 25 Most-Cited Journals and the Number of Collected
Publications from Each Journal
Journals The Number of Publications
Collected Analyzed
Academy of Management Journal 5 1
Academy of Management Review 4 1
Administrative Science Quarterly 2 2
American Economic Review -
California Management Review 13 5
Economic Journal 1 -
Harvard Business Review 16 4
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 7 1
Industrial and Corporate Change 7 3
International Journal of Technology Management 16 4
Journal of Marketing 12 7
Journal of Marketing Research 1 -
Journal of Political Economy - -
Journal of Product Innovation Management 92 29
Long Range Planning 6 3
Management Science 26 11
MIS Quarterly 24 3
MIT Sloan Management Review 12 4
Organization Science 11 4
R & D Management 52 17
Research Policy 54 28
Research-Technology Management 21 8
Strategic Management Journal 21 1
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 19 6
Technovation 13 7
Total 435 149
Appendix 2. Key Papers in Each Type of User Innovation
Appendix 2.1. Workshop-Based
No Title Journals Citations *
1 Lead users: a source of novel product concepts Management science 3943
2 Lead user analyses for the development of new
industrial products Management science 1077
3
From experience: Developing new product
concepts via the lead user method: a case study
in a “low tech” field
Journal of product
innovation management 730
4 Creating breakthroughs at 3M Harvard business review 729
5
Characteristics of innovating users in a
consumer goods field: an empirical study of
sport-related product consumers
Technovation 464
* The number of citations is based on Google Scholar data.
408
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
Appendix 2.2. Consortium-Based
No Title Journals Citations *
1 Users' contributions to radical innovation: evidence from
four cases in the field of medical equipment technology R&D Management 334
2 The role of the interaction between the user and
manufacturer in medical equipment innovation R&D Management 261
3
Community engineering for innovations: the ideas
competition as a method to nurture a virtual community
for innovations
R&D Management 242
4 Using users: when does external knowledge enhance
corporate product innovation?
Strategic Management
Journal 26
5 Collaborative prototyping: cross-fertilization of
knowledge in prototype-driven problem solving
Journal of product
innovation management 9
* The number of citations is based on Google Scholar data.
Appendix 2.3. Crowdsourcing-Based
No Title Journals Citations *
1
Performance assessment of the lead-user
idea-generation process for new product
development
Management science 788
2
Toolkits for idea competitions: a novel
method to integrate users in new product
development
R & D Management 545
3
The value of crowdsourcing: can users really
compete with professionals in generating
new product ideas?
Journal of product
innovation management 290
4 Crowdsourcing as solution to distant search American management
review 258
5 Users as service innovators: the case of
banking services Research policy 195
* The number of citations is based on Google Scholar data.
Appendix 2.4. Platform-Based
No Title Journals Citations *
1 Open source software and the “private-collective”
innovation model: issues for organization science Organization science 1756
2
Motivation of software developers in open source
projects: an internet-based survey of contributors to
the Linux kernel
Research policy 1202
3 Shifting innovation to users via toolkits Management science 1014
4 Community, joining, and specialization in open
source software innovation: a case study Research policy 844
5 Satisfying heterogeneous user needs via innovation
toolkits: the case of Apache security software Research policy 716
* The number of citations is based on Google Scholar data.
References
1. Dyllick, T.; Hockerts, K. Beyond the business case for corporate sustainability. Bus. Strategy Environ. 2002, 11,
130–141. [CrossRef]
2. Brundtland, G.; Khalid, M.; Agnelli, S.; Al-Athel, S.; Chidzero, B.; Fadika, L.; Hauff, V.; Lang, I.; Shijun, M.;
de Botero, M.M.; et al. Our Common Future; World Commission on Environment and Development: Brussels,
Switzerland, 1987.
409
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
3. Park, E.; Lee, S.; Kwon, S.J.; del Pobil, A.P. Determinants of behavioral intention to use South Korean airline
services: Effects of service quality and corporate social responsibility. Sustainability 2015, 7, 12106–12121.
[CrossRef]
4. Lee, S.; Park, E.; Kwon, S.J.; del Pobil, A.P. Antecedents of behavioral intention to use mobile
telecommunication services: Effects of corporate social responsibility and technology acceptance.
Sustainability 2015, 78, 11345–11359. [CrossRef]
5. Bogers, M.; Afuah, A.; Bastian, B. Users as innovators: A review, critique, and future research directions.
J. Manag. 2010, 36, 857–875. [CrossRef]
6. Gales, L.; Mansour-Cole, D. User involvement in innovation projects: Toward an information processing
model. J. Eng. Technol. Manag. 1995, 12, 77–109. [CrossRef]
7. Von Hippel, E. The dominant role of users in the scientific instrument innovation process. Res. Policy 1976, 5,
212–239. [CrossRef]
8. Baker, N.R.; Green, S.G.; Bean, A.S. Why R & D project succeed or fail. Res. Manag. 1986, 29, 29–34.
9. Voss, C.A. The role of users in the development of applications software. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 1985, 2,
113–121. [CrossRef]
10. Holt, K. The role of the user in product innovation. Technovation 1988, 7, 249–258. [CrossRef]
11. Lee, K.R. The role of user firms in the innovation of machine tools: The Japanese case. Res. Policy 1996, 25,
491–507. [CrossRef]
12. Von Hippel, E. The dominant role of the user in semiconductor and electronic subassembly process
innovation. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag. 1977, 24, 60–71. [CrossRef]
13. Von Hippel, E. A customer-active paradigm for industrial product idea generation. Res. Policy 1978, 7,
240–266. [CrossRef]
14. Slaughter, S. Innovation and learning during implementation: A comparison of user and manufacturer
innovations. Res. Policy 1991, 22, 81–95. [CrossRef]
15. Foxall, G. Marketing new technology: Markets, hierarchies, and user-initiated innovation. Manag. Decis. Econ.
1988, 9, 237–250. [CrossRef]
16. Chen, J.S.; Tsou, H.T.; Ching, R.K.H. Co-production and its effects on service innovation. Ind. Mark. Manag.
2011, 40, 1331–1346. [CrossRef]
17. Oliveira, P.; von Hippel, E. Users as service innovators: The case of banking services. Res. Policy 2011, 40,
806–818. [CrossRef]
18. Heiskanen, E.; Lovio, R. User-producer interaction in housing energy innovations. J. Ind. Ecol. 2010, 14,
91–102. [CrossRef]
19. Lakhani, K.R.; von Hippel, E. How open source software works: “Free” user-to-user assistance. Res. Policy
2003, 32, 923–943. [CrossRef]
20. De Jong, P.J.P.; von Hippel, E.; Gault, F.; Kuusisto, J.; Raasch, C. Market failure in the diffusion of
consumer-developed innovations: Patterns in Finland. Res. Policy 2015, 44, 1856–1865. [CrossRef]
21. Hyysalo, S.; Usenyuk, S. The user dominated technology era: Dynamics of dispersed peer-innovation.
Res. Policy 2015, 44, 560–576. [CrossRef]
22. Bayus, B.L. Crowdsourcing new product ideas over time: An analysis of the Dell IdeaStorm community.
Manag. Sci. 2013, 59, 226–244. [CrossRef]
23. Gangi, P.M.; Wasko, M. Steal my idea! organizational adoption of user innovations from a user innovation
community: A case study of Dell IdeaStorm. Decis. Support. Syst. 2009, 48, 303–312. [CrossRef]
24. Mladenow, A.; Bauer, C.; Strauss, C. Social crowd integration in new product development: Crowdsourcing
communities nourish the open innovation paradigm. Glob. J. Flex. Syst. Manag. 2014, 15, 77–86. [CrossRef]
25. Godin, B. The linear model of innovation: The historical construction of an analytical framework. Sci. Technol.
Hum. Val. 2006, 31, 639–667. [CrossRef]
26. Chesbrough, H.W. Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting from Technology;
Harvard Business School Publishing: Boston, USA, 2003.
27. Rothwell, R. Towards the fifth-generation innovation process. Int. Market. Rev. 1994, 11, 7–31. [CrossRef]
28. Henkel, J. Selective revealing in open innovation processes: The case of embedded Linux. Res. Policy 2006,
35, 953–969. [CrossRef]
29. Franke, N.; Shah, S. How communities support innovative activities: An exploration of assistance and
sharing among end-users. Res. Policy 2003, 32, 157–178. [CrossRef]
410
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
30. Franke, N.; von Hippel, E.; Schreier, M. Finding commercially attractive user innovations: A test of lead-user
theory. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 2006, 23, 301–315. [CrossRef]
31. Franke, N.; von Hippel, E. Satisfying heterogeneous user needs via innovation toolkits: The case of apache
security software. Res. Policy 2003, 32, 1199–1215. [CrossRef]
32. Lüthje, C.; Herstatt, C. The lead user method: An outline of empirical findings and issues for future research.
R D Manag. 2003, 34, 553–568. [CrossRef]
33. Morrison, P.D.; Roberts, J.H.; von Hippel, E. Determinants of user innovation and innovation sharing in a
local market. Manag. Sci. 2000, 46, 1513–1527. [CrossRef]
34. Urban, G.L.; von Hippel, E. Lead user analyses for the development of new industrial products. Manag. Sci.
1988, 34, 569–582. [CrossRef]
35. Baldwin, C.; Hienerth, C.; von Hippel, E. How user innovations become commercial products: A theoretical
investigation and case study. Res. Policy 2006, 35, 1291–1313. [CrossRef]
36. Hienerth, C. The commercialization of user innovations: The development of the Rodeo Kayak industry.
R D Manag. 2006, 36, 273–294. [CrossRef]
37. Marchi, G.; Giachetti, C.; de Gennaro, P. Extending lead-user theory to online brand communities: The case
of the community Ducati. Technovation 2011, 31, 350–361. [CrossRef]
38. Jeppesen, L.B.; Molin, M.J. Consumers as co-developers: Learning and innovation outside the firm.
Technol. Anal. Strateg. Manag. 2003, 15, 363–383. [CrossRef]
39. Von Hippel, E.; von Krogh, G. Open source software and the “private-collective” innovation model: Issues
for organization science. Organ. Sci. 2003, 14, 209–223. [CrossRef]
40. Von Krogh, G.; Spaeth, S.; Lakhani, K.R. Community, joining, and specialization in open source software
innovation: A case study. Res. Policy 2003, 32, 1217–1241. [CrossRef]
41. Shah, S.K. Motivation, governance, and the viability of hybrid forms in open source software development.
Manag. Sci. 2006, 52, 1000–1014. [CrossRef]
42. Jeppesen, L.B. User toolkits for innovation: Consumers support each other. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 2005, 22,
347–362. [CrossRef]
43. Franke, N.; Keinz, P.; Schreier, M. Complementing mass customization toolkits with user communities: How
peer input improves customer self-design. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 2008, 25, 546–559. [CrossRef]
44. Franke, N.; Piller, F. Value creation by toolkits for user innovation and design: The case of the watch market.
J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 2004, 21, 401–415. [CrossRef]
45. Jeppesen, L.B.; Lakhani, K.M. Marginality and problem solving effectiveness in broadcast search. Organ. Sci.
2010, 21, 1016–1033. [CrossRef]
46. Archak, N. Money, Glory and Cheap Talk: Analyzing Strategic Behavior of Contestants in Simultaneous
Crowdsourcing Contests on TopCoder.com. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference onWorld
WideWeb, Raleigh, NC, USA, 26–30 April 2010.
47. Orgawa, S.; Piller, F.T. Reducing the risks of new product development. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 2006, 47,
65–71.
48. Bocken, N.; Short, S.; Rana, P.; Evans, S. A literature and practice review to develop Sustainable Business
Model Archetypes. J. Clean. Prod. 2014, 65, 42–56. [CrossRef]
49. Boons, F.; Lüdeke-Freund, F. Business models for sustainable innovation: State-of-the-art and steps towards
a research agenda. J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 45, 9–19. [CrossRef]
50. Stubbs,W.; Cocklin, C. Conceptualizing a “Sustainability Business Model”. Organ. Environ. 2008, 21, 103–127.
[CrossRef]
51. Teece, D. Business Models, Business Strategy and Innovation. Long Range Plan. 2010, 43, 172–194. [CrossRef]
52. Lüdeke-Freund, F. Towards a Conceptual Framework of Business Models for Sustainability; ERSCP-EMU
Conference: Delft, The Netherlands, 2010.
53. Zott, C.; Amit, R.; Massa, L. The business model: Recent developments and future research. J. Manag. 2011,
37, 1019–1042.
54. Elkington, J. Cannibals with Forks: The Triple Bottom Line of 21st Century Business; Capstone: Oxford, UK, 1997.
55. Ehrenfeld, J.R. The Roots of Sustainability. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 2005, 46, 23–26.
56. Osterwalder, A.; Pigneur, Y. Business Model Generation: A Handbook for Visionaries, Game Changers, and
Challengers; JohnWiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2010.
411
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
57. Yunus, M.; Moingeon, B.; Lehmann-Ortega, L. Building social business models: Lessons from the Grameen
experience. Long Range Plann. 2010, 43, 308–325. [CrossRef]
58. Amit, R.; Zott, C. Creating value through business model innovation. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 2012, 53, 41–49.
59. Almirall, E.; Wareham, J. Innovation: A question of fit – the Living labs approach. In Proceedings of
Symposium on Transversal Topics, Barcelona, Spain, 2–3 April 2009.
60. Linton, J.D.; Thongpapanl, N.T. Ranking the technology innovation management journals. J. Prod.
Innov. Manag. 2004, 21, 123–139. [CrossRef]
61. West, J.; Bogers, M. Leveraging external sources of innovation: A review of research on open innovation.
J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 2014, 31, 814–831. [CrossRef]
62. Boudreau, K.J.; Lakhani, K.R. Using the crowd as an innovation partner. Harv. Bus. Rev. 2013, 91, 60–69.
[PubMed]
63. Bullinger, A.C.; Neyer, A.K.; Rass, M.; Moeslein, K.M. Community-based innovation contests: Where
competition meets cooperation. Creativity Innov. Manag. 2010, 19, 290–303. [CrossRef]
64. Lehoux, P.; Miller, F.A.; Hivon, M.; Demers-Payette, O.; Urbach, D.R. Clinicians as health technology
designers: Two contrasting tales about user involvement in innovation development. Health Policy Technol.
2013, 2, 122–130. [CrossRef]
65. Magnusson, P.R. Exploring the contributions of involving ordinary users in ideation of technology-based
services. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 2009, 26, 578–593. [CrossRef]
66. Still, K.; Huhtamäki, J.; Isomursu, M.; Lahti, J.; Koskela-Huotari, K. Analytics of the Impact of User
Involvement in the Innovation Process and its Outcomes. Case Study: Media-Enhanced Learning (MEL)
Service. In Proceedings of the Paper Presented at the 4th World Conference on Educational Sciences,
Barcelona, Spain, 2–5 February 2012.
67. Harrison, D.; Waluszewski, A. The development of a user network as a way to re-launch an unwanted
product. Res. Policy 2008, 37, 115–130. [CrossRef]
68. Jeppesen, L.B.; Laursen, K. The role of lead users in knowledge sharing. Res. Policy 2009, 38, 1582–1589.
[CrossRef]
69. Schaltegger, S.; Lüdeke-Freund, F.; Hansen, E.G. Business cases for sustainability: The role of business model
innovation for corporate sustainability. Int. J. Innov. Sustain. Dev. 2012, 6, 95–119. [CrossRef]
70. Reckwitz, A. Toward a Theory of Social Practices—A Development in Culturalist Theorizing. Eur. J.
Soc. Theory 2002, 5, 243–263. [CrossRef]
71. Shove, E. Social theory and climate change questions often, sometimes and not yet asked. Theory Cult. Soc.
2010, 27, 277–288. [CrossRef]
72. Spaargaren, G. Theories of practices: Agency, technology, and culture Exploring the relevance of
practice theories for the governance of sustainable consumption practices in the new world-order.
Glob. Environ. Chang. 2011, 21, 813–822. [CrossRef]
73. Bergvall-Kåreborn, B.; Eriksson, C.L.; Ståhlbröst, A.; Svensson, J. A Milieu for Innovation—Defining Living
Labs. In Proceedings of the 2nd ISPIM Innovation Symposium, New York, NY, USA, 6–9 December 2009.
74. Liedtke, C.; Baedeker, C.; Hasselkuβ, M.; Rohn, H. User-integrated innovation in Sustainable LivingLabs:
An experimental infrastructure for researching and developing sustainable product service systems. J. Clean.
Prod. 2015, 97, 106–116. [CrossRef]
75. McCormick, K.; Kiss, B. Learning through renovations for urban sustainability: The case of the Malmö
Innovation Platform. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 2015, 16, 44–50. [CrossRef]
76. Voytenko, Y.; McCormick, K.; Evans, J.; Schliwa, G. Urban living labs for sustainability and low carbon cities
in Europe: Towards a research agenda. J. Clean. Prod. 2015, in press.
77. Franz, Y. Designing social living labs in urban research. Info 2015, 17, 53–66.
78. Liedtke, C.;Welfens, M.J.; Rohn, H.; Nordmann, J. LIVING LAB: User-driven innovation for sustainability.
Int. J. Sustain. High. Educ. 2012, 13, 106–118. [CrossRef]
79. Guzmán, G.; del Carpio, A.F.; Colomo-Palacios, R.; de Diego, M.V. Living labs for user-driven innovation—A
process reference model. Res. Technol. Manag. 2013, 56, 29–39. [CrossRef]
80. Ståhlbröst, A.; Bertoni, M.; Følstad, A.; Ebbesson, E.; Lund, J. Social media for user innovation in Living Labs:
A framework to support user recruitment and commitment. In Proceedings of the 26th ISPIM Conference,
Helsinki, Finland, 16–19 June 2013.
412
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16039–16059
81. Leminen, S.; Nyström, A.G.; Westerlund, M. A typology of creative consumers in living labs. J. Eng.
Technol. Manag. 2015, in press. [CrossRef]
82. Georges, A.; Schuurman, D.; Baccarne, B.; Coorevits, L. User engagement in living lab field trials. Info 2015,
17, 26–39.
83. Karin, W.; Annika, Å.; Ståhlbröst, A. Exploring differences between central located test and home use test in
a living lab context. Int. J. Consum. Stud. 2015, 39, 230–238. [CrossRef]
© 2015 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
413
Article
Weak and Strong Compensation for the Prioritization
of Public Investments: Multidimensional Analysis
for Pools
Gianluigi De Mare 1,*, Maria Fiorella Granata 2,† and Antonio Nesticò 1,†
1 Department of Civil Engineering, University of Salerno, Via Giovanni Paolo II, 132,
Fisciano (SA) 84084, Italy; anestico@unisa.it
2 Department of Architecture, University of Palermo, Viale delle Scienze, ed, 14, Palermo 90128, Italy;
maria.granata@unipa.it
* Correspondence: gdemare@unisa.it; Tel.: +39-089-964118
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 9 September 2015; Accepted: 24 November 2015; Published: 2 December 2015
Abstract: Despite the economic crisis still heavily affecting most of Europe, a possible resumption
can be found in the revitalization of public and private investments. These investments should be
directed not only towards the strategic areas of infrastructures and production, but also to those
which allow for a higher level of the quality of life (sports facilities, parks, etc.). In such cases, the need
to balance the reasons of financial sustainability with environmental and social profiles is even more
evident. Thus, multicriteria techniques, supporting complex assessments, should be implemented
together with a monetary feasibility study (cost-benefit analysis). Multidimensional methods allow
for the aggregation of different profiles into overall indicators. This study gives an account of
how the application and comparison of multi-criteria approaches based on tools characterized by
a higher or lower level of compensation between criteria can broaden the spectrum of analysis of
the problems and lead to a more subtle logic of funding for public works and works of public utility,
with a more current and mature sharing of profitability between private investors and users of
community infrastructures.
Keywords: multicriteria evaluation; economic assessment; sports facilities; strong and weak
sustainability; SMART; PROMETHEE II
1. Introduction
The formation of metropolitan cities, with geographic extensions much greater than the past,
and the integration of original cultures from different countries raise the level of complexity of
infrastructures in urban systems (transport, education, health, sports, etc.). At the same time, the recent
economic crisis has placed the institutions that have historically been producers of the investment
needed for such public works in front of the problem of having to find sufficient financial resources.
In Europe, the financing channels have been primarily identified as the resources made available by
the European Community, as well as the most advanced forms of public-private partnership. Private
partners base the decision about their adhesion to projects of public interest on the fundamental
criterion of the economic and financial convenience, which must be verified by using the appropriate
financial evaluation techniques. Although the verification of the economic and financial feasibility is
a necessary requirement for the realization of the project by private parties, the interest of the local
community can be measured through a purely monetary analysis [1–4]. Therefore, the point of view of
the public authority is broader. Based on the adopted strategic policies, it is interesting to know the
level of satisfaction on social, cultural and environmental requests [5].
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038; doi:10.3390/su71215798 414 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
Public authorities should therefore be able to expertly mediate between the monetary feasibility
of investments and its social and political coherence compared to the demands of growth and
development from the population. In this perspective, it is important to be capable of “measuring” the
suitability of either a public project or a project of public interest, in meeting the needs expressed by
the local community. The measure of this capacity can be applied to a dual purpose: (1) identification
of local priority projects to be considered within the definition of tools for territorial government; and
(2) preparation of appropriate measures supporting the projects of public interest, which, although
possibly characterized by a smaller economic attractiveness for private investors, can make a more
significant contribution to the welfare of the community.
The assessment of the ability of a project of public interest in meeting the needs of the local
community has a multidimensional nature and must be able to integrate the local political preferences
delegated to land management.
To this end, the definition of composite indices, capable of integrating the quality of the urban
projects from the point of view of the community into an overall assessment, is useful. These synthetic
indexes can be used as evaluation instruments of the quality of urban projects from the perspective
of the community and can pose parameters of judgment to identify reliefs, for example of a financial
or tax nature, that can direct the membership of private partners to projects that are more favorable
to the community. They can also be used to identify priority actions in the field of local strategic and
financial planning.
The main functions of a composite index of sustainability related to a public work or a work of
public interest can be identified in the ability to synthetically express the quality of the project in terms
of the objectives of sustainability, to encourage communication with all of the involved parties and to
legitimize choices derived from a rational and transparent analysis of the available alternatives [6].
The purpose of this paper is the construction of socio-environmental convenience indexes and
integrated sustainability indexes for the provision of sports facilities. The index must summarize the
main needs expressed by the stakeholders. Composite indicators of this type can also be defined for
different types of projects.
This objective is pursued using different multi-criteria evaluation techniques, in view of the
distinction between “weak sustainability” and “strong sustainability”, opposing the idea of the almost
complete against the idea of only the limited substitutability of natural capital with physical capital,
respectively [7]. In particular, two different decision-making models, suitable for evaluating the
contribution of public investments and private investments of public interest from the two-fold point
of view of sustainability understood in a weak and strong sense, are proposed.
The model described in this paper is useful for the construction of a multi-dimensional index
of “restricted social convenience” and “overall social convenience” or “overall sustainability” for
investments targeted at the creation or adaptation of municipal swimming pools in the province of
Salerno (Italy). The paper is organized in some introductory Section 2, Section 3, Section 4, Section 5,
Section 6 and Section 7 on multicriteria tools for the construction of convenience indicators, in sections
on the processing of models (8 and 9) and sections summarizing and discussing the results in Section 10
and Section 11.
2. The Formulation of a Social Convenience Index for Investments of a Public Nature
Synthetic indexes or composite indicators are evaluation tools widely used in decision-making
on economy, environment, globalization, society, innovation and technology [8], public policies [9],
sustainability about single civil engineering works [10] and at a local level [11], as well as in ranking
countries [12].
Several aggregation procedures have been proposed to build a composite indicator integrating
manifold issues [13,14]; however, from an operational point of view, they are the result of an
aggregation rule applied to values representing the performance of a given alternative on a set
of criteria.
415
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
The construction of a social synthetic index includes the following fundamental steps:
1. the carrying out of a detailed analysis of the basic needs of the local community as an instrument
guiding the identification of the relevant points of view in the analysis of alternatives [15];
2. the choice of a suitable aggregation procedure, considering the use of the composite indicator in
the sustainable management of the territory and the necessity of being easily understandable for
local administrators, even if they do not have specific technical competences in decision analysis;
3. the weighting of considered indicators;
4. the implementation of the aggregative model for each alternative, in order to obtain the value of
the indexes.
In general, either weights are directly attributed by experts or special techniques used in order to
achieve more objective values. The assignment of weights to single indicators for their aggregation is
considered a crucial step in social multicriteria evaluation, and a good solution could be the renunciation
of their same assignment, considering, therefore, equal weights for all of the indicators. In this case, the
number of the considered indicators will represent the importance of the criterion that they express [8].
The choice of aggregation procedure is also an important step for the essential implications of
each procedure. Furthermore, it is known that the application of different decision models can lead to
different results for the same decision problem [6,16].
The main aggregation approaches belong to Multiple Attribute Utility Theory (MAUT) [17,18],
outranking methods, introduced by Bernard Roy [19], and other “non-classical” approaches [20].
Procedures belonging to classical approaches are all suitable for handling the aggregation of
single one-dimensional indicators in a comprehensive index, since they can deal with both quantitative
and qualitative information, as well as give as an outcome a measure of the performance of the
considered alternatives.
The procedures belonging to the outranking approach, like the PROMETHEE (Preference
Ranking Organization METHod for Enrichment Evaluations) [21] and ELECTRE (ELimination
Et ChoixTraduisant la REalité) methods [19], which are based on a pair-wise comparison of the
alternatives, use weights representing the coefficient of importance and are not, in general, totally
compensatory methods [22]. This is the reason why they are able to support a strong sustainability
concept in which a bad performance on an indicator is not fully compensated by a good performance
on another one [8]. The outranking approach assumes the hypothesis of the preferential independence
of any sub-family of indicators [22].
Approaches based on multi-attribute utility theory require the consideration of an n-dimensional
utility function that assigns a value to each alternative, representing its preferability. In general, the
n-dimensional utility function is constructed by aggregating one-dimensional utility functions on a
single criterion, to which a weight may be associated [18]. Using this kind of procedure, the preferential
independence of the family of indicators is also assumed, so that the marginal utilities can be assessed;
the different indicators have to be expressed on the same scale; and the weights represent substitution
rates [22].
The additive and multiplicative techniques are the most widely used form of aggregation
function [23]. Other aggregation techniques, such as the class of Ordered Weighted Averaging (OWA)
operators [24] and the Choquet integral [25,26], belong to the MAUT framework and are extensions of
weighted means. OWA operators are able to express vague quantifications, and the Choquet integral
can model interactions among criteria [27].
3. Social Convenience Indexes for Investments in Swimming Pools
In the present paper, a synthetic index of “restricted social convenience” related to projects
for supplying sports facilities to a local community is defined. The proposed composite indicator
comprehends both environmental aspects, as well as appropriate social aspects. Furthermore, a
416
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
composite index of “overall social convenience”, also called “overall sustainability”, for the same
projects is defined. It synthesizes the environmental, social and financial aspects.
Various reasons can explain the preference commonly given to the use of procedures based on
additive value functions in the construction of synthetic indexes of sustainability:
- the modeling of preferences is rather intuitive and therefore easily understandable by non-experts;
- the value functions assign a comprehensive value to each alternative and not a measure of the
degree of preference of an alternative over another;
- unlike the outranking methods, the comparability of alternatives is always possible [22];
- the outcomes are robust due to the independent evaluation of each alternative [28].
The above-mentioned reasons also justify the decision to use the MAUT approach, in the weighted
linear form, for the formulation of an index of social convenience relating to investments for the creation
or adaptation of sports facilities [29]. Furthermore, MAUT approaches allow for compensation among
the different points of view integrated in the assessment procedure [22], with the result being agreeable
to the assumption of a weak conception of sustainability [8], that is suitable for local contexts with
several social needs to be satisfied.
With the aim of testing the results obtained with different aggregation techniques, in relation
to the conception of sustainability in the strong or weak sense, in the present study, a comparison is
made between the results achieved with the use of a compensatory aggregation procedure and of
one that tends to partly compensate for the poor performance on some criteria with the favorable
performance on other criteria. Therefore, the outcomes of the available alternatives’ evaluation through
the weighted linear sum aggregation model, in the simplified version SMART (simple multi-attribute
rating technique), will be compared to those obtained by using a less compensatory aggregation
technique. In particular, the PROMETHEE II procedure will be used. The choice of the two aggregation
procedures is justified in the following section.
4. Reasons for the Choice of Aggregation Procedures
Using multi-criteria assessments for real decision-making problems in the public sector, the
easiness of understanding the method and the minimum request for preference information from
the decision-makers have been highlighted as key features of a suitable decision-making model [6].
Since in the evaluation process for the formulation of the aggregate index of the investments’ social
convenience, the role of the decision-maker is held by political institutions, in general not equipped
with specific skills in the field of mathematical techniques for multi-criteria evaluation; the simplicity
of the method is considered essential for the contribution of the decision-makers in eliciting their
preferences, with it being more conscious and less prone to errors of interpretation.
As stated, the use of the MAUT approach is a widespread choice in the elaboration of sustainability
indexes. In view of the difficulties detected in practice for defining the trade-off between the criteria [28]
and due to the lack of information on the marginal utility functions, it was decided to resort to the
simplified formulation of the linear model MAUT, known as SMART. In contrast to the SMART method,
which like the other additive models is fully compensatory, an outranking method is used. Procedures
belonging to this class may have more or less a degree of compensation between the criteria [22].
Endowed with a greater comprehensibility for the decision-makers than ELECTRE methods [30],
the PROMETHEE II procedure is implemented here. It provides a single complete preorder, although
the non-compensatory level is more limited compared to other ELECTRE methods, in particular in the
absence of thresholds of preference, indifference and veto [31]. Applying the PROMETHEE II, we opt
for the functional form of the “usual criterion”, which avoids the definition of indifference and/or
preference thresholds, which is typically a complex [28,31,32] and time-consuming [33] exercise for
decision-makers. Neglecting the use of thresholds implies that any difference between two evaluations
produces a strict preference for the alternative having a better, even if small, evaluation with respect
the considered criterion.
417
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
SMART and PROMETHEE II are relatively simple multi-criteria evaluation procedures and
therefore easily comprehensible by non-expert actors involved in the assessment. In particular,
as previously mentioned, among the possible forms adoptable for the preference function of the
outranking procedure, the “usual criterion” is chosen, since it does not require the definition of
additional parameters and whose understanding is intuitive. The application domains of both
procedures fit our decision problem [34], since they can treat discrete cardinal and ordinal information;
they can also solve choice and ranking decision problems; they use the same type of inter-information
between criteria, since weights reflect the relative importance between criteria [21,35]; they can be
implemented using a simple spreadsheet. In addition, weights do not depend on the measurement
scale of the criteria, both in the PROMETHEE II procedure [30] and in SMART, since in the
latter, the measurement scales are normalized [35]. These circumstances make their task easier for
decision-makers [33] and allow for the comparison of the results obtained by the two procedures.
5. Insertion of the Present Work in Literature Reviews
SMART and PROMETHEE methods are among the most used aggregation tools and have been
applied to a wide variety of decision problems.
A literature review up to the year 2010 is given by Behzadian et al. [30], revealing an abundant
production of the applications of PROMETHEE methods concerning logistic and transportation
problems; energy, water, environment and business management; chemistry, manufacturing and social
topics. In more recent years, there has been a great deal of interest in applying the various PROMETHEE
methods, and a large number of applications about the management of natural resources is available;
see Kuang et al. [36]. Only a recent interest has been shown for the specific field of assessment for
the sustainability of cities and territories. The surveyed applications are on decisions at a building
scale [37], urban scale [32,38] and on an overall assessment of global cities [39].
The main application of SMART is on environmental management decisions [40–42], but it is
also proposed for a public assessment application for mitigation and adaptation policy [43], as well as
transport [44]. On an urban scale, it is used in assessing the sustainability of built heritage [45], local
energy systems [46] and urban ecosystems [47–50].
The main aspects central to the present work are the comparison between different aggregation
procedures in multicriteria assessment and the issue of weak and strong sustainability. Previous works
have made comparisons between different assessment methods, according to the technical characteristics
of algorithms, as in [16,51], in order to make choices coherent with sustainability assessment problems [23]
or to compare the results with aided decisions [52]. Compared to previous works, we aim to compare the
outcomes from different assessment methods with regard to the compensatory effect, and confronting
SMART and PROMETHEE II, we exclude the use of thresholds, as in [51], in order to investigate
the differences between the considered methods under maximum similarity conditions. Regarding
sustainability assessment, there is a very large amount of literature on every sector and, in particular,
urban areas, as in [53], while the issue of weak and strong sustainability has been mainly addressed from a
methodological point of view [8,13,54–56]. Although there have been some specific applicatory works
on regions [57], countries [58,59], fisheries [60] and urban heritage [61], the need to address the issue of
assessment application on weak and strong sustainability [62] has been recognized. In this work, the
SMART and PROMETHEE II methods are used to assess the sustainability of single public projects in an
urban context. In particular, they are applied to a swimming pool ranking problem.
6. Aggregation by the SMART Procedure
The weighted linear aggregation is the usual procedure used in the computation of composite
indicators. Using SMART, a simplified form ofMAUT[35,63] given a set of alternatives {A1, A2, . . . Am},
a set of indicators {c1, c2, . . . cn} and their respective weights {w1, w2, . . . wn}, a synthetic index (V)
418
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
related to the alternative j is obtained by applying a weighted additive aggregation model, according
to the following mathematical rule:
V pAiq “
ÿ
i vij¨wi i “ 1, 2, ..., n (1)
with: ÿ
i
wi “ 1 and 0 ď wi ď 1 (2)
where vi,j is the normalized performance value on the indicator ci and wi is the normalized weight [8].
The assessment vi,j is standardized to a 0–1 scale, where zero and one represent the worst and best
performances, respectively [36]. The weights can be assigned by the direct rating method, according to
which raw weights are assigned to criteria ranked according to their importance, attributing a score of
10 to the least important criterion, then assigning increasing scores to the other criteria in relation to
the first score and, finally, normalizing the sum of the assigned weights to one [35].
While in MAUT models, weights reflect both scale and importance, in SMART, weights reflect
only importance, since the scales are transformed to a common basis [64].
7. Aggregation by the PROMETHEE II Procedure
PROMETHEE procedures are based on the outranking relation, according to which an alternative
outranks another alternative if, given the preferences of the decision-makers, there are sufficient
arguments for recognizing that the first alternative is not less preferable than the second one [22]. The
construction of the outranking relation in the PROMETHEE II method is characterized by the use of
variables and parameters that are easily understandable by unexperienced decision-makers [22].
Introduced by Brans and Vincke [21], the PROMETHEE methods have been used in
applications related to multiple fields [32], but their use is not widespread in the construction of
composite indicators.
Given a set of alternatives {A1, A2, . . . Am} and a system of indicators {c1, c2, . . . cn} with their
respective weights {w1, w2, . . . wn} and knowing the performances of alternatives on single criteria,
the outranking degree corresponding to an ordered couple of alternatives (Ar, As) is defined by the
aggregated preference index, expressing the preference of Ar over As according to all of the criteria [65]:
π pAr, Asq “
ÿn
i“1 Pi pAr, Asqwi with i “ 1, 2, ..., n (3)
in which Pi (Ar, As) is a preference function related to the criteria i. Preference functions are defined
by suitable functional forms and associated parameters, assigning to the differences between the
performance of two alternatives on a criterion, di (Ar, As) = ci (Ar) ´ ci (As), a preference degree ranging
from 0–1. Among the available forms of the preference function [65], the one able to better express
the preferences of the decision-makers will be chosen for each criterion. In the proposed assessment
model, the usual criterion has been adopted for all of the considered criteria. In case of a criterion i to
be maximized, comparing the alternatives Ar and As, the usual criterion expresses a strict preference
of Ar in comparison with As only if the difference di (Ar, As) is positive. The choice is founded on the
need to use a very simple assessment model that can be easily understood by decision-makers and
on the advisability of not requiring the use of a threshold of indifference and/or of strict preference.
Thus, the generalized usual criterion does not require additional information in comparison to the
simple formulation of MAUT considered here. The preference function related to the usual criterion is
expressed as follows [65]:
Pi pAr, Asq “
#
0 i f di pAr, Asq ď 0
1 i f di pAr, Asq ą 0
(4)
This form of the generalized criterion corresponds to the “true criterion” [66], expressing a strict
preference for any difference between two evaluations [67].
419
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
Finally, the PROMETHEE II procedure leads to a unique complete preorder ranking the
alternatives according to a decreasing order of values of the net outranking flow ϕ(Ar) for each
alternative that is given by:
ϕ pArq “ ϕ
` pArq´ ϕ
´ pArq (5)
where ϕ+(Ar) is the positive flow and ϕ
´(Ar) is the negative flow, representing how the alternative
Ar outranks the other ones and how Ar is outranked by the other alternatives. Positive and negative
flows are expressed as follows [65]:
ϕ
` pArq “ 1
m ´1
ÿ
k‰i
π pAr, Asq with r “ 1, 2, ...,m (6)
ϕ
´ pArq “ 1
m ´1
ÿ
k‰i
π pAs, Arq with r “ 1, 2, ...,m (7)
8. Three Projects for Municipal Pools in the Province of Salerno (Italy)
8.1. The swimming pool in Nocera Inferiore
The project involves the construction of an indoor swimming center to be built in the town of
Nocera Inferiore (Salerno). The plant will be able to be approved by the Italian Swimming Federation,
based on the safety standards of the Italian Olympic National Committee (CONI) and the Ministry of
Interior, which set the size of the tanks according to the activities that must take place. The plant is
designed to emit into the atmosphere the least possible amount of pollutants and adopts alternative
methods of energy production, in the present case thermo-photovoltaic hybrid panels.
The project involves the construction of a semi-Olympic indoor pool with a size of 25 per 16.66 m
and of two smaller swimming pools of 16.66 per 8 m, one dedicated to children and the other for
rehabilitation activities and water aerobics. Some services dedicated to users are also planned. They
include a bar, a solarium, a sauna and a gym. The structure is articulated on a single level consisting
of a space for the swimming pools and a service block. The structure of external cladding of the
service block will be made of panels with improved thermal performances, while the coverage of the
swimming pool area will be in curved laminated wood.
8.2. The swimming pool in Sapri
This swimming pool will be realized in the city of Sapri, more precisely in the south, in Brizzi,
close to the town center. Currently, the area is a sports ground, and with the realization of the structure,
it will become a real sports center. This project involves the construction of a concrete structure cast
in situ to be used as a reception and dressing room for athletes. The construction of the roof of the
swimming pool is planned in precast prestressed concrete.
The pool for sports (swimming, water polo) has dimensions of 12.60 m for 25.00 m and a constant
depth of 2.00 m, with an area of 315 m2 and a volume of 630 m3. The flat roof around the pool will
have a width of 2.50 m along the long side and of 4.00 m along the other side, according to the norms
of the Italian Olympic National Committee (CONI).
The pool cover, entirely prefabricated, will consist of prestressed elements and pillars, with a total
area of 747 m2 (40.60 m for 18.40 m) and a practicable deck.
8.3. The swimming pool in Salerno
The plant is located in the center of Salerno. The project will cover the top of the adult pool,
the reconstruction of the same pool, the construction of adjacent changing rooms, the renovation of
the existing building and the installation of parking areas equipped with photovoltaic shelters. The
projected plant includes an outdoor swimming pool of 28 m ˆ 20 m ˆ 1.60 m, an outdoor swimming
pool for children of 11 m ˆ 6 m ˆ 0.50 m, a solarium around the swimming pools, two changing
rooms with toilets and showers, a waiting room with reception, an infirmary, a bar room, an engine
420
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
room, a boiler room, an outdoor parking area for about fifty cars and a green area adjacent to the
swimming plant.
9. Calculation of the Composite Indicators for the Three Municipal Pools
Relevant indicators have been selected on the basis of an in-depth analysis of the local context
conducted by the provincial public authority [68], as well as data taken from ISTAT (Istituto
Nazionale di Statistica—National Institute of Statistics) on the local social, environmental and economic
characteristics. According to ISTAT, young people are the main users of sports facilities; some student
associations as the potential user basin of each swimming pool were involved in a discussion aimed at
understanding their opinions about what features they expected a sustainable swimming pool should
have. Table 1 presents the final value tree, including the goal, criteria and indicators, while Table 2
describes the single indicators, and Table 3 shows their direction and the measurement scales. The
set of selected criteria represents all of the key sustainability aspects in relation to the specific context,
avoiding redundancy [66].
While the environmental and social aspects define the “restricted social convenience” of the
investments in question, the addition of the pre-taxation internal rate of return allows for the assessment
of the “overall sustainability”, which integrates the financial feasibility.
The aesthetic quality of the projects has not been included in the set of criteria, because the
alternatives can be considered as having the same level of architectonic quality.
While indicators I1, I4, I6 and I7 are measured in their natural scales, indicators I2, I3 and I5 express
qualitative judgments. Their levels of performance are measured according to the values shown in Table 4.
Table 1. Value tree.
Goal Criteria Codes-Indicators
Overall sustainability
Environmental issues
I1—Spared emissions from plants
I2—Preservation of natural land
I3—Accessibility
Social issues
I4—Level of supply of swimming services
I5—Synergistic effect
I6—Employment effect
Financial issue I7—Pre-taxation internal rate of return
Table 2. Description of indicators.
Codes-Indicators Description
I1—Spared emissions from plants
It measures the spared emission of CO2 per user due to the
reduction of energy consumption from traditional energy
sources
I2—Preservation of natural land It expresses the quality of a project regarding the shift of
natural land to artificial areas
I3—Accessibility It regards the presence of dedicated parking for users and the
quality of a suitable public transport service
I4—Level of supply of swimming
services
It concerns the level of the supply of swimming services
against the local level of demand.
I5—Synergistic effect
It is achieved if the swimming plant is localized near other
sports facilities, creating an integrated system of sports
facilities useful also as a center for social gathering
I6—Employment effect It expresses the contribution to the development of new
employment
I7—Pre-taxation internal rate of return It expresses the financial feasibility of the investment
421
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
Table 3. Information on indicators.
Codes-Indicators Direction Measurement Scale
I1—Spared emissions from plants To be
maximized kg CO2/year
I2—Preservation of natural land To be
maximized Judgment measured on an ordinal scale
I3—Accessibility To be
maximized Judgment measured on an ordinal scale
I4—Level of supply of swimming services To be
maximized
Supply of swimming services/relative
demand
I5—Synergistic effect To be
maximized Judgment measured on an ordinal scale
I6—Employment effect To be
maximized Number of employees
I7—Pre-taxation internal rate of return To be
maximized Value on 0–1 scale
Table 4. Levels of performance for indicators I2, I3 and I5.
I2 I3 I5
Performance-Score Performance-Score Performance-Score
Reuse of already
built land 10
Presence of dedicated parking
and of a suitable public
transport service
10 Nearness to more than one
sports facility 10
Presence of dedicated parking
and of an insufficient public
transport service
5 Nearness to one sports facility 5
Shifting of natural
land to artificial area 0
Absence of dedicated parking
and of a suitable public
transport service
0 Nearness to no sports facility 0
Table 5 summarizes the performance of the considered projects for swimming facilities on the set
of indicators. The projects cover three geographical areas of the province of Salerno, which are the city
of Salerno, the city of Nocera and the city of Sapri.
Table 5. Performance table.
Indicators Projects
Salerno Nocera Sapri
Environmental issues
I1 (kg CO2/year) 81,620 80,465 106,000
I2 (ordinal judgment) 10 0 0
I3 (ordinal judgment) 10 5 5
Social issues
I4 (supply/demand) 0.96 1 1
I5 (ordinal judgment) 5 10 5
I6 (number of employees) 25 40 15
Fin. issue I7 (Pre-taxation internal rate of return) 0.129 0.117 0.140
For the purposes of the aggregation of the performances of the alternatives using the SMART
method, we consider the standardized marginal utility functions assigning the value one to the best
performance according to the considered indicator and the value zero to the worst one with the linear
form of marginal utilities for indicators.
The aggregation of performances by the PROMETHEE II method does not require the
transformation into a common scale, thanks to a pairwise comparison between the alternatives.
422
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
Initially, we calculated the synthetic index of the “restricted” social convenience relative to the
alternatives under consideration. Regarding the weights, in the first assessment, we attached the same
value to all of the indicators (0.166), by giving the same importance to the social and environmental
criteria. This choice is justified by the consideration that the social and environmental issues are the
main topics of sustainability in the considered local context.
Using the “distance from the best and worst performers” technique [6], the normalized
performance table is obtained (Table 6).
Finally, according to Equations (1) and (5), the composite indicators of the restricted social
convenience (RSC) related to the considered projects are calculated (Table 7). They express the
environmental and social quality of each project.
The local administrations involved can choose the system of weights that best suit their policies.
The composite indicators shown in Table 7 refer to a situation in which the same importance is attached
to individual indicators and then to the two social and environmental criteria. However, if the social
aspects are considered doubly more important than the environmental ones, the composite indicators
will become the RSC’ ones of Table 8.
Table 6. Normalized performance table.
Criteria
Projects
Salerno Nocera Sapri
I1 0.05 0 1
I2 1 0 0
I3 1 0 0
I4 0 1 1
I5 0 1 0
I6 0.40 1 0
Table 7. Composite indicators of social convenience obtained by assuming equal importance of the
social and environmental aspects. RSC, restricted social convenience; SMART, simple multi-attribute
rating technique.
Projects Composite Indicators
RSC (SMART) RSC (PROM.)
Salerno 0.41 0.083
Nocera 0.50 0.082
Sapri 0.33 ´0.167
On the contrary, if the environmental issues are twice preferred in comparison to the social issues,
the requested synthetic indexes are those in the columns RSC” of Table 8. The different preferences
related to the relative importance among the indicators could still be considered to better represent the
preferences of the decision-maker.
Table 8. Composite indicators of social convenience obtained taking a double preference for the social
aspects with respect to the environmental ones (RSC1) and vice versa (RSC”).
Projects RSC1 (SMART) RSC1 (PROM.) RSC” (SMART) RSC” (PROM.)
Salerno 0.316 ´0.111 0.499 0.278
Nocera 0.667 0.333 0.333 ´0.167
Sapri 0.333 ´0.222 0.333 ´0.111
We then calculated the composite indicators of the overall sustainability (SC) obtained
by integrating in the evaluation the contribution of the financial feasibility to the aspects of
social convenience.
423
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
Table 9 shows the composite indexes of integrated sustainability obtained with the SMART
and PROMETHEE II procedures assuming equal importance to the three categories (the social,
environmental and financial one) of the indicators.
Table 9. Composite indicators of integrated sustainability obtained by assuming equal importance for
the social, environmental and financial aspects.
Projects Composite Indicators
SC (SMART) SC (PROM.)
Salerno 0.449 0.055
Nocera 0.333 ´0.278
Sapri 0.555 0.222
Finally, Table 10 presents the aggregate indices obtained by attributing to the social aspects
a double importance compared to the environmental ones, while the environmental and financial
aspects are considered of equal importance (SC1) and the aggregate indices obtained by giving to the
environmental aspects a double importance in comparison to the social ones, while the financial and
social aspects are considered of equal importance (SC”).
Table 10. Composite indicators of integrated sustainability obtained by assuming a double preference
for the social aspects over the environmental and financial ones (SC1) and vice versa (SC”).
Projects SC1 (SMART) SC1 (PROM.) SC” (SMART) SC” (PROM.)
Salerno 0.371 ´0.083 0.509 0.208
Nocera 0.501 0.000 0.250 ´0.375
Sapri 0.500 0.083 0.500 0.167
10. Summary and Discussion of the Results
In this paper, the simplified linear aggregative model SMART and the PROMETHEE II model
have been tested with the aim of verifying their utility in the elaboration of synthetic indexes for the
choice or ranking of investments in urban development. Table 11 presents the rankings obtained
through the use of the two procedures for the aggregation of the partial evaluation of the alternatives
on the criteria.
As expected, the outcomes of the evaluation carried out by the considered methods lead to
different scenarios. The comparison between the evaluation table (Table 3) and the ranking table
(Table 11) induces the following considerations.
Assuming the same importance attributed to the classes of indicators, the exclusion of the financial
parameter in the valuation of the synthetic index penalizes the investment in the territory of Sapri,
which is the most disadvantaged for two out of three indicators for both the social category and the
environmental aspects. Using SMART, the best performances of the alternative A2 (Nocera) on the
social indicators offset the very bad performances on the environmental aspects. On the contrary,
PROMETHEE II rewards the more balanced performances of the alternative A1 (Salerno).
If an equal importance is recognized for the various classes of indicators, the inclusion of the
financial parameter in the evaluation of the synthetic index reverses the ranking of the investment
in Sapri, which is the most disadvantaged for two out of three indicators for both the social and
environmental categories. The drawback is re-balanced by the best financial performance.
Assuming a greater importance is attributed to the class of indicators on the social aspects
compared to all of the remaining considered classes, the exclusion of the financial parameter in the
evaluation of the synthetic index rewards, using both aggregation procedures, the investment in the
territory of Nocera, which has the best performance on the social category. For the successive positions
of the ranking, while PROMETHEE II awards the most balanced performances for the environmental
424
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
aspects of the alternative A1-Salerno, SMART gives the highest-ranking to the alternative A3-Sapri, for
which the best performance on the indicator I1 is able to balance the bad performances on the remaining
environmental indicators. Analogous considerations can be made about the remaining rankings.
Nevertheless, the analysis of the results outlines some clearly legible trends.
Table 11. The obtained rankings.
RSC (SMART) RSC (PROM.)
Nocera Salerno
Salerno Nocera
Sapri Sapri
SC (SMART) SC (PROM.)
Sapri Sapri
Salerno Salerno
Nocera Nocera
RSC1 (SMART) RSC1 (PROM.)
Nocera Nocera
Sapri Salerno
Salerno Sapri
SC1 (SMART) SC1 (PROM.)
Nocera Sapri
Sapri Nocera
Salerno Salerno
RSC” (SMART) RSC” (PROM.)
Salerno Salerno
Nocera-Sapri Sapri
Nocera-Sapri Nocera
SC” (SMART) SC” (PROM.)
Salerno Salerno
Sapri Sapri
Nocera Nocera
In the aggregation carried out neglecting the financial criterion, both aggregative models indicate
that the project in Sapri is the poorer. In fact, four times it is the last in the ranking, and two times it is
penultimate. On the contrary, the projects in Nocera and Salerno share the leadership, with three first
positions and two second places in the rankings.
Moreover, the compensatory effect of the procedure SMART seems to show itself. In fact, the
procedure favors the project in Nocera (two first places and one second place in the rankings), whose
profile of performances consists of three maximum values and three minimum values (see Table 4).
Instead, the PROMETHEE method favors the project with a more balanced profile (Salerno; two times
in the first position in the rankings and one time in the second position).
The outlined framework dismantles itself with the introduction of the financial criterion. First, the
project in Sapri becomes by far the dominant one (three times it is in the first position of the rankings
and three times first in the second one). It is followed by the project in Salerno (two times in the first
position of the rankings and two times in the second one) and then by the project in Nocera (one time
in the first position of the rankings and one time in the second one).
However, what is most striking is the substantial stabilization of the rankings obtained using the
two methods. In developing the indices SC and SC”, the rankings obtained by the two methods do not
change. Sapri-Salerno-Nocera is the ranking outlined applying both SMART and PROMETHEE in
the calculus of the index SC. Salerno-Sapri-Nocera is the ranking obtained using both SMART and
PROMETHEE for the index SC”. In the calculation of SC1, the project in Salerno always occupies the
425
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
third position in the rankings, regardless of the used aggregation procedure, while the projects in
Nocera and Sapri are reversed in the leadership.
This last evidence has strategic implications that deserve attention. The substantial stabilization
of the results achieved using a more compensatory aggregation procedure (SMART) or a less
compensatory one (PROMETHEE) leads to distrust of easy propaganda proclamations. In fact, it
would be easy for decision-makers to convey the use of a non-compensatory aggregation procedure as
a political choice of strong sustainability, when the same results are reached using a compensatory
method. Therefore, in such cases, the prevalence of a project over another one does not arise from the
application of stricter selective rules, but from the same nature of the projects that shows a very stable
relative placement (obviously with respect to the introduced criteria).
11. Conclusions
As previously stated, the reconciliation of social, environmental and financial requirements
places decision-makers in front of scenarios that are often complex, articulated or even conflicting.
Multicriteria analysis techniques can support decision-makers in making aware and rational choices.
In comparison with the analysis carried out by the same authors in a previous work [29] where
the rankings of the considered investments for supplying swimming pools in the south of Italy were
completely opposite when a sustainable approach from an exclusively socio-environmental point of
view or a merely financial approach were alternatively considered, the analysis presented in this paper
characterizes the use of a multicriteria technique and a more articulated pattern of evaluation with
regards to the considered set of weights.
Unlike the previously mentioned experiences, the new pattern of valuation combines the financial
profile with the socio-environmental one in the versions SC’ and SC”, and this integration destabilizes
the previously obtained rankings.
In fact, if the overall effects are considered, the investment in Sapri, which according to the first
analysis conducted neglecting the financial criterion ranks four times out of six in the bottom position,
rises to a top position three times out of six when the financial criterion is taken into consideration.
The investment in Nocera, which was the best one three times out of six, ranks in the bottom position
four times out of six.
However, the main difference is recorded for the investment in Salerno. If only the criteria
belonging to the social and environmental class are considered when calculating the synthetic
index [29], it ranks in an intermediate position, both attributing a greater importance to the socioenvironmental
aspects. In the new implementation, it has a better position in the rankings, whether
the financial criterion is neglected or is taken into consideration.
Figure 1 shows the prevailing projects according to the considered assessment procedures. Using
SMART, the project in Nocera prevails three times over the others, while using PROMETHEE, the
more balanced project in Salerno is preferred three times. This result confirms the less compensative
effect of the used outranking method.
Figure 1. Prevailing projects according to the considered aggregation methods
The present analysis, which deserves further investigation from the point of view of the stability
of outcomes on the basis of statistical techniques, highlights the huge responsibility of decision-makers
426
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
when choices are also based on social and environmental principles and not merely on monetary
criteria, even if a multidimensional assessment is carried out. This consideration is confirmed by the
strictness imposed by the European Commission on the management of public funds, but also poses
limits that must be revised when funds are of a private nature, considering the levels of profitability
that can be shared with the community.
Another interesting development of this work could be a comparison of the outcomes of the
assessment methods used with those coming from the use of specific aggregation procedures able
to include interaction effects among the criteria, such as the Choquet integral or the ELECTRE III
method with interactions between the criteria [69], in order to consider the different levels of strong
and weak compensability.
Finally, it should be noted that the results of the implemented calculations seem to indicate that
certain investment projects have performances on the criteria that make the rankings obtained robust
through more or less compensatory aggregation procedures. This condition, where conveniently
checked on a larger sample of study, leads to repudiation of the necessity of the adoption of a
non-compensatory aggregation procedure in order to obtain a decision of strong sustainability.
The adoption could instead simply hide manipulative intentions in the choices on the allocation
of public resources.
Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for the valuable comments that
contributed to the improvement of the manuscript.
Author Contributions: The authors contributed equally to this work.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Fusco Girard, L., Ed.; Le Valutazioni per lo Sviluppo Sostenibile Della Città e del Territorio; FrancoAngeli: Milano,
Italy, 1997.
2. Nijkamp, P., (Ed.) Sustainability of Urban System; Aldershot: Avebury, UK, 1990.
3. Rizzo, F. Il Capitale Sociale Della Città. Valutazione, Pianificazione e Gestione; Franco Angeli: Milano, Italy, 2003.
4. De Mare, G.; Nesticò, A.; Tajani, F. Building Investments for the Revitalization of the Territory: A
Multisectoral Model of Economic Analysis. In Proceedings of the 3th International Conference, ICCSA 2013,
Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, 24–27 June 2013; Murgante, B., Misra, S., Carlini, M., Torre, C., Nguyen, H.-Q.,
Taniar, D., Apduhan, B.O., Gervasi, O., Eds.; Springer Verlag: Berlin, Germany; Heidelberg, Germany, 2013;
Volume 7973, pp. 493–508.
5. European Ministers Responsible for Urban Development. Leipzig Charter on Sustainable European Cities.
Final Draft; European Ministers Responsible for Urban Development: Leipzig, Germany, 2007.
6. Lahdelma, R.; Salminen, P.; Hokkanen, J. Using Multicriteria Methods in Environmental Planning and
Management. Environ. Manag. 2000, 26, 595–605. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Daly, H.E.; Cobb, J.B., Jr. For the Common Good; Beacon Press: Boston, MA, USA, 1989.
8. Munda, G. Multiple Criteria Decision analysis and Sustainable Development. In Multiple Criteria Decision
Analysis: State of the Art Surveys; Figueira, J., Greco, S., Ehrgott, M., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2005;
pp. 953–986.
9. Munda, G. Social Multi-Criteria Evaluation; Springer-Verlag: Heidelberg, Germany; New York, NY, USA, 2007.
10. Bob, C.; Dencsak, T.; Bob, L. A Sustainability Model for the Assessment of Civil Engineer Works. In
Recent Advances in Energy, Environment, Biology and Ecology, Proceedings of the 10th WSEAS International
Conference on Energy, Environment, Ecosystems and Sustainable Development (EEESD 114), Tenerife, Spain,
10–12 January 2014; WSEAS Press: Sofia, Bulgaria, 2014; pp. 161–168.
11. Laz˘ar, C.; Laz˘ar, M. Proposal of a sustainable development synthetic indicator at local level. In Proceedings
of the 9th WSEAS International Conference on Mathematics & Computers in Business and Economics
(MCBE 108), Bucharest, Romania, 24–26 June 2008; WSEAS Press: Sofia, Bulgaria, 2008; pp. 74–78.
12. OECD. JRC European Commission, Handbook on Constructing Composite Indicators. Methodology and User Guide;
OECD Publishing: Paris, France, 2008.
427
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
13. Munda, G. Choosing aggregation rules for composite indicators. Soc. Indic. Res. 2012, 109, 337–354.
[CrossRef]
14. Granata, M.F. The city management: Methodological Considerations on the Multiple Criteria Techniques. In
The Right to the City. Human Rights and the City Crisis; Beguinot, C., Ed.; Giannini Editore: Naples, Italy, 2012;
pp. 295–319.
15. Sustainable Cities International—Canadian International Development Agency. Indicators for Sustainability.
How Cities Are Monitoring and Evaluating Their Success; Sustainable Cities International—Canadian
International Development Agency: Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2012.
16. Olson, D.L. Comparison of three multicriteria methods to predict known outcomes. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2001,
130, 576–587. [CrossRef]
17. Von Neumann, J.; Morgenstern, O. Theory of Games and Economic Behaviour, 2nd ed.; Princeton University
Press: Princeton, NJ, USA, 1947.
18. Keeney, R.L.; Raiffa, H. Decisions with Multiple Objectives Preferences and Value Tradeoffs; John Wiley&Sons:
New York, NY, USA, 1976.
19. Roy, B. Classement et choix en presence de points de vue multiples (la méthode ELECTRE). RAIRO 1968, 8,
57–75.
20. Figueira, J.; Greco, S.; Ehrgott, M. Introduction. In Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis: State of the Art Surveys;
Figueira, J., Greco, S., Ehrgott, M., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2005; pp. xxi–xxxvi.
21. Vincke, P.; Brans, J.P. A preference ranking organization method. The PROMETHEE method for MCDM.
Manag. Sci. 1985, 31, 641–656.
22. Vincke, P. Multicriteria Decision-Aid; JohnWiley & Sons: Chichester, UK, 1992.
23. De Montis, A.; de Toro, P.; Droste-Franke, B.; Omann, I.; Stagl, S. Assessing the quality of different MCDA
methods. In Alternatives for Environmental Valuation; Getzner, M., Spash, C., Stagl, S., Eds.; Routledge:
London, UK, 2005; pp. 99–133.
24. Yager, R.R. On ordered weighted averaging aggregation operators in multi-criteria decision making.
IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybernet. Part B 1988, 18, 183–190. [CrossRef]
25. Choquet, G. Theory of capacities. Ann. de l’Inst. Fourier 1953, 5, 131–295. [CrossRef]
26. Sugeno, M. Theory of Fuzzy Integrals and Its Applications. Ph.D. Thesis, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
Tokyo, Japan, 1974.
27. Grabisch, M. The application of fuzzy integrals in multicriteria decision making. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 1996, 89,
445–456. [CrossRef]
28. Munda, G. The issue of consistency: Basic discrete multi-criteria “Methods”. In Social Multi-Criteria Evaluation
for a Sustainable Economy; Munda, G., Ed.; Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Germany; Heidelberg, Germany, 2008;
pp. 85–109.
29. De Mare, G.; Granata, M.F.; Nesticò, A. Complex efficiency of sports facilities. Multicriteria and financial
analysis for swimming pools. In Advances in Environmental and Geological Science and Engineering, Proceedings
of the 8th International Conference on Environmental and Geological Science and Engineering (EG 115),
Salerno, Italy, 27–29 June 2015; WSEAS Press: Sofia, Bulgaria, 2015; pp. 96–103.
30. Behzadian, M.; Kazemzadeh, R.B.; Albadvi, A.; Aghdasi, M. PROMETHEE: A comprehensive literature
review on methodologies and applications. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2010, 200, 198–215. [CrossRef]
31. Polatidis, H.; Haralambopoulos, D.A.; Munda, G.; Vreeker, R. Selecting an appropriate multi-criteria decision
analysis technique for renewable energy planning. Energy Sources Part B 2006, 1, 181–193. [CrossRef]
32. Cilona, T.; Granata, M.F. Multicriteria Prioritization for Multistage Implementation of Complex Urban
Renewal Projects. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference Computational Science and Its
Applications—ICCSA 2015, Banff, BC, Canada, 22–25 June 2015; Gervasi, O., Murgante, B., Misra, S.,
Gavrilova, M.L., Rocha, A.M.A.C., Torre, C., Taniar, D., Apduhan, B.O., Eds.; Part III, LNCS 9157. Springer
Verlag: Berlin, Germany; Heidelberg, Germany, 2015; pp. 3–19.
33. Cinelli, M.; Coles, S.R.; Kirwan, K. Analysis of the potentials of multi criteria decision analysis methods to
conduct sustainability assessment. Ecol. Indic. 2014, 46, 138–148. [CrossRef]
34. Guitouni, A.; Martel, J.M. Tentative guidelines to help choosing an appropriate MCDA Method. Eur. J.
Oper. Res. 1998, 109, 501–521. [CrossRef]
35. Von Winterfeldt, D.; Edwards, W. Decision Analysis and Behavioral Research; Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, UK, 1986.
428
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
36. Kuang, H.; Kilgour, D.M.; Hipel, K.W. Grey-based PROMETHEE II with application to evaluation of source
water protection strategies. Inf. Sci. 2015, 294, 376–389. [CrossRef]
37. Le Téno, J.F.; Mareschal, B. An interval version of PROMETHEE for the comparison of building products’
design with ill-defined data on environmental quality. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 1998, 109, 522–529. [CrossRef]
38. Juan, Y.-K.; Roper, K.O.; Castro-Lacouture, D.; Kim, J.H. Optimal decision making on urban renewal projects.
Manag. Decis. 2010, 48, 207–224. [CrossRef]
39. Kourtit, K.; Macharis, C.; Nijkamp, P. A multi-actor multi-criteria analysis of the performance of global cities.
Appl. Geogr. 2014, 49, 24–36. [CrossRef]
40. Ulvila, J.W.; Snider, W.D. Negotiation of international oil tanker standards: An application of multiattribute
value theory. Oper. Res. 1980, 28, 81–96. [CrossRef]
41. Comer, J.L.; Kirkwood, C.W. Decision analysis applications in the operations research literature 1970–1989.
Oper. Res. 1991, 39, 206–219.
42. Taylor, J.M., Jr.; Love, B.N. Simple multi-attribute rating technique for renewable energy deployment
decisions (SMART REDD). J. Def. Model. Simulat. Appl. Methodol. Technol. 2014, 11, 227–232. [CrossRef]
43. Papadopoulos, A.M., Konidari, P., Eds.; Overview and Selection of Multi-Criteria Evaluation Methods for
Mitigation/Adaptation Policy Instruments; PROMITHEAS—4: Athens, Greece, 2011.
44. Barfod, M.B., Leleur, M., Eds.; Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis for Use in Transport Decision Making, 2nd ed.;
Technical University of Denmark: Copenhagen, Denmark, 2014.
45. Dutta, M.; Husain, Z. An application of Multicriteria Decision Making to Built Heritage. The case of Calcutta.
J. Cult. Herit. 2009, 10, 237–243. [CrossRef]
46. Kılkı¸s, S. Composite index for benchmarking local energy systems of Mediterranean port cities. Energy 2015.
[CrossRef]
47. Kılkı¸s, S. Sustainable development of energy, water and environment systems index for Southeast European
cities. J. Clean. Product. 2015. [CrossRef]
48. Dizdaroglu, D.; Yigitcanlar, T. A parcel-scale assessment tool to measure sustainability through urban
ecosystem components: The MUSIX model. Ecol. Indic. 2014, 41, 115–130. [CrossRef]
49. Dizdaroglu, D.; Yigitcanlar, T.; Dawes, L. A micro-level indexing model for assessing urban ecosystem
sustainability. Smart Sustain. Built Environ. 2012, 1, 291–315. [CrossRef]
50. Yigitcanlar, T.; Dur, F.; Dizdaroglu, D. Towards prosperous sustainable cities: A multiscalar urban
sustainability assessment approach. Habitat Int. 2015, 45, 36–46. [CrossRef]
51. Salminen, P.; Hokkanen, J.; Lahdelma, R. Comparing multicriteria methods in the context of environmental
problems. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 1998, 104, 485–496. [CrossRef]
52. Hajkowicz, S. A comparison of multiple criteria analysis and unaided approaches to environmental decision
making. Environ. Sci. Policy 2007, 10, 177–184. [CrossRef]
53. Kostevšek, A.; Klemeš, J.J.; Varbanov, P.S.; Cˇ ucˇek, L.; Petek, J. Sustainability assessment of the locally
integrated energy sectors for a Slovenian municipality. J. Clean. Product. 2015, 88, 83–89. [CrossRef]
54. Roy, B. Decision aid and decision making. In Readings in Multiple Criteria Decision Aid; Bana e Costa, C.A., Ed.;
Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Germany; Heidelberg, Germany, 1990; pp. 17–35.
55. Munda, G. Intensity of preference and related uncertainty in non-compensatory aggregation rules.
Theory Decis. 2012, 73, 649–669. [CrossRef]
56. Pollesch, N.; Dale, V.H. Applications of aggregation theory to sustainability assessment. Ecol. Econ. 2015,
114, 117–127. [CrossRef]
57. Floridi, M.; Pagni, S.; Falorni, S.; Luzzati, T. An exercise in composite indicators construction: Assessing the
sustainability of Italian regions. Ecol. Econ. 2011, 70, 1440–1447. [CrossRef]
58. Ostasiewicz, K. Ordering EU countries according to indicators of sustainable development. Statistika 2012,
49, 30–51.
59. Dietz, S.; Neumayer, E. Weak and strong sustainability in the SEEA: Concepts and measurement. Ecol. Econ.
2007, 61, 617–626. [CrossRef]
60. Garmendia, E.; Prellezo, R.; Murillas, A.; Escapa, M.; Gallastegui, M. Weak and strong sustainability
assessment in fisheries. Ecol. Econ. 2010, 70, 96–106. [CrossRef]
61. Dalmas, L.; Geronimi, V.; Noël, J.-F.; Sang, J.T.K. Economic evaluation of urban heritage: An inclusive
approach under a sustainability perspective. J. Cult. Herit. 2015, 16, 681–687. [CrossRef]
429
Sustainability 2015, 7, 16022–16038
62. Janeiro, L.; Patel, M.K. Choosing sustainable technologies. Implications of the underlying sustainability
paradigm in the decision-making process. J. Clean. Product. 2015, 105, 438–446. [CrossRef]
63. Edwards,W. How to use multiattribute utility measurement for social decision making. IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybernet. 1977, 7, 326–340. [CrossRef]
64. Edwards, W.; Barron, F.H. Smarts and Smarter: Improved Simple Methods for Multi Attribute Utility
Measurement. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 1994, 60, 306–325. [CrossRef]
65. Brans, J.P.; Mareschal, B. Promethee methods. In Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis: State of the Art Surveys;
Figueira, J., Greco, S., Ehrgott, M., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2005; pp. 163–195.
66. Roy, B. Méthodologie Multicritère d’Aide à la Décison; Economica: Paris, France, 1985.
67. Bouyssou, D. Building criteria: A prerequisite for MCDA. In Readings in Multiple Criteria Decision Aid;
Bana e Costa, C.A., Ed.; Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Germany; Heidelberg, Germany, 1990; pp. 58–80.
68. Relazione Previsionale e Programmatica 2012–2014. Available online: http://googo.pw/url?sa=t&rct=
j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwiFwNDpxa3JAhXBF5QKHedtB08QFggcMAA&url=http%
3A%2F%2Fwww.comune.rozzano.mi.it%2Findex.php%2Fmodulistica%2Fdoc_download%2F697-relazioneprevisionale-
e-programmatica-2012-2014.html&usg=AFQjCNHewDYQAw5x7gsCoUT-9znqiRisOQ&cad=rja
(accessed on 18 November 2015).
69. Figueira, J.R.; Greco, S.; Roy, B. ELECTRE methods with interaction between criteria: An extension of the
concordance index. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2009, 199, 478–495. [CrossRef]
© 2015 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
430
Article
The Concept of Sustainable Strategy Implementation
Joanna Radomska
Strategic Management Department, Wrocław University of Economics, ul. Komandorska 118/120,
53-345 Wrocław, Poland; joanna.radomska@ue.wroc.pl; Tel.: +48-71-36-80-195
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 21 October 2015; Accepted: 19 November 2015; Published: 27 November 2015
Abstract: The idea of sustainable development has been present in the field of management for
many years, yet the challenges and rules of contemporary business mean that it remains topical.
At the same time, the results of much research indicates an unsatisfactory level of execution of
development concepts. Due to this, the subject of the study encompasses the implementation of
the idea of sustainability in the strategy execution process, lending it a holistic and balanced nature.
The purpose of the paper is an examination of the relationship between strategy implementation and
the effectiveness of the strategy execution process. The relationships between the perspectives defined
and results obtained by organizations were investigated. The research demonstrated the existence
of a positive correlation of varied intensity. It is thus possible to identify a positive influence of the
integration of the idea of sustainability with strategy execution, which is reflected in the effectiveness
of activities undertaken.
Keywords: strategy execution; sustainability; strategic management process
1. Introduction
An increasing pressure to ensure productivity and effectiveness forces companies to improve their
management systems, making them ever more complex. Confirmation of this trend is visible in the
implementation of holistic management models which emphasize the need to concentrate on the high
quality of the functionality of their components [1]. It is thus possible to find recommendations referring
to the sustainable design of the strategic management process in the literature. Sustainability is defined
as a concept of the holistic perspective of development integrated with organizational goals, internal
incentives and evaluation systems, and organizational decision support systems [2]. Sustainable
strategic management is an effect of the natural evolution of strategic thinking towards meeting
expectations placed by the environment [3]. An ever greater number of organizations have therefore
begun to notice that the idea of sustainability is becoming a natural element of their actions and not an
issue separated from a strategy being executed [4]. Additionally, as some of the research results prove,
it is a factor leading to a reduction in risk accompanying the strategy realization [5]. It results not only
in a change in perspective and perception of organizing the strategy implementation process, but also
indicates the need for an integration of its aspect [6]. It is described in Figure 1.
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15847–15856; doi:10.3390/su71215790 431 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15847–15856
Figure 1. Strategy implementation process (including the sustainability concept). Source: own work
based on [7].
Despite application advantages, sustainability is still rarely combined with strategic
management [8]. The objective of this work is an examination of the relationships between sustainable
strategy implementation and the effectiveness of the strategy execution process. On the basis of the
literature, sustainable strategy implementation has been defined using seven perspectives: leadership,
strategy, employees, corporate values, resources, tools and processes. The effectiveness of strategy
execution, however, comprises both the level to which the strategic aims established are achieved and
income dynamics.
As some of the authors indicate, the discipline of strategic management evolves in the direction
of a comprehensive and systematic approach, while openness to differentiation and complexity is
becoming the domain of those organizations that demonstrate efficacy and consistency in the realization
of development concepts devised [9]. It is worth mentioning that the decisions connected with the
aspect of sustainability are treated as strategic decisions reflected in the strategy itself as well as in
the corporate culture and values [10,11]. In this context, the idea of sustainability, based on continuity,
flexibility and comprehensiveness, is becoming of key importance [12]. This comprehensiveness and
balance should characterize the perspectives forming a strategy implementation process. Various
approaches to their definition may be adopted, beginning with standard elements of the concept of
sustainability [6], through an approach derived from the concept of the Balanced Scorecard [13]
or Total Quality Management [14], to the use of models depicting key aspects of the strategy
execution process [15] or approaches based on them, for instance distinguishing systems, people
and programs [16]. For this article, we chose those which combine the approaches mentioned above
and form a comprehensive set of elements of a varied nature, which is considered to be a condition for
efficacy in the realization of the idea of sustainability [17]. In order to speak of sustainable strategy
implementation, it is necessary to accept a strategic approach [18] guaranteeing that the concept
of sustainability is an integrated part of a strategic management process [19]. This means that it is
essential to incorporate it at three levels—the normative (corporate values, employees, leadership) [20],
the strategic (strategy, goals) [21] and the operational (processes, resources, tools) [22].
The first of the perspectives described contains the element naturally associated with sustainability:
corporate values. Taking actions which serve the promotion of basic rules and ensuring their cohesion
with the vision is a complement to a sustainable strategy execution process. It is an integral element
432
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15847–15856
combining operational activities with expected results [23]. The literature indicates the existence of a
phenomenon described as a “value gap” based on the maladjustment of strategy and the process of its
execution to higher values. It becomes crucial then to introduce changes to the process necessary to
ensure that activities and expected results remain cohesive [24]. One of the tools assisting with this,
and included in this area, is the system of informal communication supporting the comprehension of
the vision and strategic goals [25], and at the same time, the integration of the entire strategy execution
process [26].
The second perspective is the area of employees, significant because of the necessity, emphasised
by many researchers, of paying attention to the nature of the objectives being accomplished by a
company and the way in which the results achieved are measured. Aside from financial outcomes,
organizational outcomes are mentioned ever more often [27]. These are inseparably linked with the
issue of employee engagement in strategies being executed and competitive advantage achieved as
a result [28]. Some research indicates that this perspective should be treated as a leading element in
strategy implementation as it has a substantial influence on the improvement of company results [29].
It is linked not only with involving employees in work on strategy formulation, but also with the
supporting role which they play in achieving long-term goals [30]. Those organizations which obtain
good implementation results are able to focus employee attention effectively on tasks connected with
strategic goal achievement, which involves assigning decision-making powers as well as establishing
clear measures for the appraisal of their effects [31].
The third of the perspectives described is emphasized by a great many authors: leadership as
an element linking a strategy, on the one hand, with resources and employees, on the other [32].
The attitudes of managers toward sustainable strategy execution and the perception of particular
perspectives of this process directly affect not only its course [33], but also the attitudes of other
employees (especially mid-level management) [34]. In order to implement the concept successfully, a
change in thinking and attitude is crucial, as these are inseparably linked with leadership [35]. This is
also pointed out by [36], who emphasises that the duties of leaders should encompass such tasks as
the creation of an aligned mental model, the promotion of individual ownership of the whole, and the
cultivation of aligned behaviors.
The fourth perspective, associated with the strategic level, encompasses both strategy and strategic
goals. Results of some research indicate that, in many cases, it is not poor execution, but the strategy
itself which results in unsatisfactory outcomes [37]. This relates especially to ambiguous definition,
a lack of priorities indicated, or a concept of development not adjusted to internal and external
determiners [38]. Cocks [39] mentions a vague and blurred strategy among the reasons for failures in
implementation, with this often directly linked to a lack of clarity in basic development rules and their
coherence with the set of objectives specified [40]. It is indicated in the literature on the subject that the
perspective of strategy is closely associated with resources and people and should not be separated
from them, but treated holistically as an integral part of a larger whole [41].
Moving on to the operational level, it is worth beginning with the perspective of resources, mainly
due to the fact that ensuring sustainability means efficient as well as effective use of available resources
with a simultaneous orientation toward strategic objective accomplishment [42]. Moreover, the results
of research conducted indicate that resource constraints are a significant and frequently occurring
obstacle to strategy execution [43]. Additionally, the question of problems relating to allocation and
effective use must be considered [44]. Effectiveness, in this case, does not refer only to an economic
aspect, but should also encompass the idea of sustainability, and therefore an allocation of resources
which ensures the coherence and integrity of all processes, including the process of strategy realization.
In considering the perspective of strategy execution, it is worth mentioning that the most
important role is played by the controlling and implementation of progress measurement systems,
which are, at the same time, an element supporting the integration process for all of the perspectives
described [45]. It is related to the greatest extent to resources and especially to the issue of changes in
organizational structure allowing the efficient use of resources possessed [46]. On the other hand, it is
433
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15847–15856
necessary to analyze not only the process by which the results of a strategy are measured, since aligning
processes and systems to reinforce the desired behaviors and outcomes of equal importance [47]. This
therefore relates also to the motivation system, which should be associated with the strategy execution
stage [48]. This makes necessary actions aimed at indicating connections between a strategy introduced
and other processes within the organization and their design such that they comply with the idea
of sustainability.
The last of the perspectives described covers implementation tools. Within the set utilized in the
process of strategy execution, Balanced Scorecard displays the greatest integration with the concept of
sustainability [49], particularly the non-financial measures [50]. The authors also indicate the use of
scheduling and budgeting as well as formal implementation programs, this serving the appropriate
allocation of resources and identification of key performance indicators [51]. Measurement may, on the
other hand, be supported by strategic controlling [52]. The catalogue of tools is complemented by the
strategy map, which may also be considered an element of sustainability due to the fact that it serves
the presentation of the manner in which the organization creates value [53] and is able to support other
perspectives thanks to its flexibility, operating character, and indication of certain decision-making
powers [54].
2. Experimental Section
2.1. Sample and Data Collection, Research Tools
The group of respondents included managers of 200 corporate headquarters that have been
operating for at least five years and are listed among the 500 largest Polish companies in the ranking of
Polityka magazine (101 entities) and in the “Forbes Diamonds 2013” ranking (99 companies). The first
ranking takes account of sales revenues, the total revenues of the companies, the gross and net profits,
as well as the number of employees. The “Diamonds” list included the companies showing the
fastest increase in value. The research sample was selected based on the participation in the rankings
and thereby achieving market success in the implementation of developed strategies. The obtained
results thus could be perceived as an example of good practices, and proposals formulated on this
basis could have a universal character. The grounds for undertaking research in the field of strategy
implementation were based on the importance of implementation actions and the necessity to ensure
consistency between the effects of implementation projects or programs and their operating results. It
was especially crucial to identify barriers that hinder the combination of ongoing actions with their
strategic implications. The results of the conducted research could be applied, in practice, as a base of
knowledge used by the management staff to increase the flexibility and effectiveness of the strategic
management process.
The study was conducted using the PAPI (Paper and Pencil Interview) technique; the quantitative
survey was carried out with the use of a method based on collecting the data the standardized way. In
order to ensure the highest possible representativeness, the sample was selected using the stratified
random sampling method. The primary goal of the research was to diagnose the factors that support
and hinder the implementation of the strategy. The research tool focused on:
(1) identification of instruments and tools used during the strategy implementation process
(2) defining the procedures and systems supporting strategy execution
(3) analyzing the system for monitoring the effects of strategy implementation
The questions in the questionnaire were of nominal value (the respondents declared the existence
of specific issues) and ordinal variable nature (the respondents indicated the strength of their impact
on a five-point scale). In order to test the hypotheses, Pearson's correlation coefficient was calculated.
434
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15847–15856
2.2. Hypotheses
As described above, it was assumed that sustainable strategy implementation consists of
seven perspectives:
‚ Leadership (1): the activities of leaders motivating employees effectively; their possession
of sufficient knowledge and skills; a clear division of competences, decision-making powers,
and responsibility
‚ Strategy (2): clearly formulated assumptions, internal coherence in development concept (cohesion
of vision, objectives, schedule, and budget) and its flexibility (a lack of single-variant solutions
adopted in the strategy)
‚ Employees (3): employee identification with the strategy being executed and acceptance,
elimination of internal interest groups hindering strategy execution, employee participation
at the strategy formulation phase
‚ Corporate Values (4): organization of the work of multi-tasking teams, establishment of an efficient
informal communication process, provision of coherence between the vision and corporate values
‚ Resources (5): possession of appropriate financial resources, deployment of the knowledge
of employees at various levels, changes in organizational structure allowing effective use of
resources possessed
‚ Tools (6): the use of Balanced Scorecard, strategy maps, strategic controlling and implementation
programs as well as budgeting and task scheduling
‚ Processes (7): a regular measurement of progress in implementation, an incentive system relating
employee salary level to the degree to which strategic goals are achieved, a system monitoring the
company environment
Effectiveness of strategy execution has been defined by:
‚ the level of achievement of strategic goals assumed (A): as an indicator of the efficacy of
activities performed
‚ income dynamics (B): as an indicator of the effects of activities performed
In order to accomplish the research objectives assumed, the following hypothesis was formulated:
H: There is a positive interdependency between a sustainable strategy implementation and the effectiveness
of its execution.
Auxiliary hypotheses were formulated to verify which of the sustainable strategy implementation
areas has the greatest influence on the effectiveness of strategy execution.
H1: Competent leadership affects growth in effectiveness of strategy execution.
H2: Smooth functioning of processes affects growth in effectiveness of strategy execution.
H3: Proper formulation of a strategy affects growth in effectiveness of its execution.
3. Results and Discussion
The first stage of the research was the calculation of the average responses to the perspectives
of sustainable strategy implementation described above and the degree of effectiveness of strategy
execution for each entity surveyed. Table 1 presents the results of the research.
435
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15847–15856
Table 1. Averages for the sustainability perspectives and degree of effectiveness of strategy execution.
Perspective Mean SD
Leadership 3.84 0.872
Strategy 3.41 0.932
Employees 3.94 0.836
Corporate Values 2.98 0.854
Resources 3.05 0.902
Tools 3.95 0.934
Processes 3.89 0.875
Strategy Execution Effectiveness 3.75 0.869
As the research results show, received values are quite similar. The lowest level was obtained in
the case of corporate values, which may indicate that this aspect is emphasized less than the others or
the extent of the activities within the organizations surveyed is relatively low. It is certainly connected
with their intangible nature and difficult transposition to particular activities of defined measurability
(this relating in particular to informal communication along with the coherence of the vision and
corporate values).
Further interdependencies between specified perspectives and results obtained (presented in
Table 2) were investigated.
Table 2. Correlations between perspectives of sustainable strategy execution.
Perspective Leadership Strategy Employees Corporate
Values Resources Tools Processes
Leadership 1.00 0.763 0.854 0.553 0.638 0.558 0.785
Strategy 0.763 1.00 0.706 0.606 0.714 0.842 0.869
Employees 0.854 0.706 1.00 0.536 0.521 0.684 0.637
Corporate
Values 0.553 0.606 0.536 1.00 0.516 0.498 0.502
Resources 0.638 0.714 0.521 0.516 1.00 0.873 0.742
Tools 0.558 0.842 0.684 0.498 0.873 1.00 0.863
Processes 0.785 0.869 0.637 0.502 0.742 0.863 1.00
The analysis of results obtained once more indicates the lowest level of correlation between
corporate values and other perspectives. This is quite a surprising result, as most publications
emphasize the role of this area in effective organization management, while the research conducted
indicates that this is a rather marginal role compared with other perspectives. The highest results
were received in the case of the perspective related to strategy, which demonstrates the importance of
the development concept itself and its connection with other areas. This confirms results of research
conducted by other authors, indicating that precision, coherence and flexibility of strategy are of great
significance in the process of its execution. This interdependency should therefore be highlighted,
being a basis for an effective strategy execution process for managers. Relatively high results were
also obtained in the case of processes. This also confirms assumptions of other researchers concerning
the procedure of the measurement process, motivation and analysis of information flowing from the
environment as the elements which contribute to the proper functioning of other areas connected to
strategy execution.
The interdependency between a sustainable strategy implementation and the effectiveness of the
execution of this process was also examined.
The result obtained (correlation 0.693) allows for the claim that the interdependency between the
issues examined is high. This means that the higher the coherence and comprehensiveness of activities,
and thus the fuller the provision of a sustainable perspective of the strategy implementation process
for the organization, the higher its degree of effectiveness. Those organizations which are aware of the
436
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15847–15856
mutual interrelations of particular perspectives obtain better results in activities undertaken and are
therefore more effective at achieving strategic goals, which may also translate into a growth in income
dynamics. The main hypothesis can therefore be accepted. Further analysis of the results, however,
indicated certain differences in the interdependencies between particular perspectives, as the results
below show (Table 3).
Table 3. Correlation between particular perspectives of sustainable strategy implementation and the
effectiveness of strategy execution.
Perspectives Strategy Execution Effectiveness
Leadership 0.686
Strategy 0.523
Employees 0.574
Corporate Values 0.358
Resources 0.632
Tools 0.741
Processes 0.753
Analyzing the results, it is worth paying attention first to the lowest correlation level in the case of
corporate values (0.358), which confirms the earlier observations that this element does not constitute a
factor substantially affecting results obtained. Other correlations show at least an average positive level
of interdependency, with the highest results received for tools (0.741), processes (0.753) and leadership
(0.686). This proves that these perspectives are the most powerful elements improving the results of
implementation operations and should be treated as priorities. It is worth mentioning, however, that
positive correlations were obtained for all of the perspectives, which may be considered a basis for the
indication of certain implications: ensuring a holistic, coherent and sustainable attitude to the strategy
execution process has a positive influence on the effectiveness of the results achieved. The sustainable
nature of the process may be reached through a concentration not only on issues related to human
capital and values, but also on operational matters (organization of processes or tools). Although some
of these appear to be of greater importance, all have an impact on the success of the process. All of the
hypotheses may therefore be accepted.
4. Conclusions
There is no doubt that there is no one universal model of sustainable strategy implementation that
can be applied successfully to different types of organizations, as this is closely related not only to the
specifics of the company, but also the types or nature of the strategies being executed [55]. This means
that it is possible to identify various levels of advancement of activities ensuring a sustainable strategy
execution process [56] of a varied level of effectiveness [57]. However, as indicated by a great many
results of studies, some of which were mentioned in this article, it is possible to identify the positive
influence of the integration of the idea of sustainability with strategy implementation, which is reflected
in the effectiveness of activities undertaken.
On the basis of the research, practical implications for executives may also be indicated. The
strategy execution process is a complex question which consists of interdependent elements. Accepting
a sustainable approach allows for the adoption of a holistic perspective and comprehension of the
reciprocal influence of particular aspects and enables a balanced implementation procedure. This
paper allows us to understand better what factors should be considered while analyzing the process
of strategy execution in order to ensure complex development integrated with organizational goals.
Moreover, the findings of the study provide interesting insights for implementing the sustainable
approach which might help to improve organizational decision support systems. Those are the reasons
identified in this paper that could be mentioned as practical implications connected with the concept
of a sustainable strategy execution process.
437
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15847–15856
The main limitation of this study is connected with the subjectivity of the answers provided.
Although the group of respondents was chosen among the managers and executives, there is a risk that
the answers could have been incomplete or did not fully represent the processes and examined issues
in a particular organization. The chosen perspectives of sustainability could also be further examined
and their number or description could be investigated. Moreover, it is necessary to verify with further
study the extent to which the idea of sustainable strategy implementation differs depending on the
size of the organization and the branch in which it operates.
Acknowledgments: Acknowledgments: The project was financed with the funds of The National Science Centre,
the project number 2014/13/D/HS4/01425 and DEC-2011/03/B/HS4/04247.
Conflicts of Interest: Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.
References
1. Cierna, H.; Sujova, E. Parallels between corporate social responsibility and the EFQM excellence model. MM
Sci. J. 2015, 10, 670–676. [CrossRef]
2. Hallstedt, S.; Ny, H.; Robert, K.; Broman, G. An approach to assessing sustainability integration in strategic
decision systems for product development. J. Clean. Prod. 2010, 18, 703–712. [CrossRef]
3. Stead, J.; Stead, W. The coevolution of sustainable strategic management in the global marketplace.
Organ. Environ. 2013, 26, 162–183. [CrossRef]
4. Vencato, C.; Gomes, C.; Scherer, F.; Kneipp, J.; Bichueti, R. Strategic sustainability management and export
performance. Manag. Environ. Qual. Int. J. 2014, 25, 431–455. [CrossRef]
5. Yilmaz, A.K.; Flouris, T. Managing corporate sustainability: Risk management process based perspective.
Afri. J. Bus. Manag. 2010, 4, 162–171.
6. Talwar, B. Business excellence models and the path ahead. TQM J. 2011, 23, 91–109. [CrossRef]
7. Ignacy, J. Strategy execution model based on research results. In Strategy Implementation in Polish Enterprises;
Moszkowicz, K., Ed.; PWNWarsaw: Warsaw, Poland, 2015; p. 193.
8. Kiron, D.; Kruschwitz, N.; Rubel, H.; Reeves, M.; Fuisz-Kehrbach, S.-K. Sustainability’s next frontier: Walking
the talk on the sustainability issues that matter most. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 2013, 12, 3–26.
9. Doz, Y.; Thanheiser, H. Regaining competitiveness: A process of organizational renewal. In Strategic Thinking.
Leadership and the Management of Change; Hendry, J., Johnson, G., Newton, J., Wiley, J., Eds.; Wiley: New York,
NY, USA, 1993.
10. Stead, J.; Stead, W. Eco-enterprise strategy: Standing for sustainability. J. Bus. Ethics 2000, 24, 313–329.
[CrossRef]
11. Jin, B.Z.; Bai, Y. Sustainable development and long-term strategic management. Embedding a long-term
strategic management system into medium and long-term planning. World Future Rev. 2011, 3, 49–69.
[CrossRef]
12. Szulanski, G.; Kruti, A. Learning to make strategy: Balancing discipline and imagination. Long Range Plan.
2001, 34, 537–556. [CrossRef]
13. Goswami, P.; Banwet, D.; Goswami, K. Sustainable operation management using the balanced score card as
a strategic Tool–A research summary. Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 2015, 189, 133–143.
14. Gómez Gómez, J.; Martínez Costa, M.; Martínez Lorente, Á. A critical evaluation of the EFQM model. Int. J.
Qual. Reliab. Manag. 2011, 28, 484–502. [CrossRef]
15. Higgins, J. The eight ‘S’s of successful strategy execution. J. Change Manag. 2005, 5, 3–13. [CrossRef]
16. Branzei, O.; Nadkarni, A. The Tata way: Evolving and executing sustainable business strategies. Ivey Bus. J.
2008, 72, 1–5.
17. Lozano, R. A holistic perspective on corporate sustainability drivers. Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Manag.
2015, 22, 32–44. [CrossRef]
18. Galbreath, J. Building corporate social responsibility into strategy. Eur. Bus. Rev. 2009, 21, 109–127. [CrossRef]
19. Engert, S.; Rauter, R.; Baumgartner, R. Exploring the integration of corporate sustainability into strategic
management: A literature review. J. Clean. Prod. 2015, in press. [CrossRef]
438
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15847–15856
20. Baumgartner, R. Managing corporate sustainability and CSR: A conceptual framework combining values,
strategies and instruments contributing to sustainable development. Corp. Soc. Responsib. Environ. Manag.
2014, 21, 258–271. [CrossRef]
21. David, F. Strategic Management; Merrill Publishing Company: Columbus, OH, USA, 1989; p. 34.
22. Bonn, I.; Fisher, J. Sustainability: The missing ingredient in strategy. J. Bus. Strat. 2011, 32, 5–14. [CrossRef]
23. Van Marrewijk, M. A value based approach to organization types: Toward a coherent set of
stakeholder-oriented management tools. J. Bus. Ethics 2004, 55, 147–158. [CrossRef]
24. Pateman, A. Linking strategy to operations: Six stages to execution. Bus. Perform. Manag. 2008, 12, 10–13.
25. Epstein, M.; Burchard, B. Counting What Counts: Turning Corporate Accountability to Competitive Advantage;
Perseus Books: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2000; p. 52.
26. De Sousa Filho, J.M.; Wanderley, L.; Gómez, C.; Farache, F. Strategic corporate social responsibility
management for competitive advantage. Braz. Adm. Rev. 2010, 7, 294–309. [CrossRef]
27. Kramar, R. Beyond strategic human resource management: Is sustainable human resource management the
next approach? Int. J. Hum. Resour. Manag. 2014, 25, 1069–1089. [CrossRef]
28. Buller, P.; McEvoy, G. Strategy, human resource management and performance: Sharpening line of sight.
Hum. Resour. Manag. Rev. 2012, 22, 43–56. [CrossRef]
29. Para-González, L.; Jiménez-Jiménez, D.; Martínez-Lorente, Á. The importance of intellectual capital in the
EFQM model of excellence. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Intellectual Capital, Cartagena,
Spain, 9–10 April 2015; pp. 253–261.
30. Paraschiv, D.; Nemoianu, E.; Lang˘a, C.; Szabó, T. Eco-innovation, responsible leadership and organizational
change for corporate sustainability. Amfiteatru Econ. 2012, 14, 404–419.
31. Henman, L. Turn great strategy into great execution. MWorld Winter 2010, 9, 29.
32. Heras-Saizarbitoria, I.; Marimon, F.; Casadesús, M. An empirical study of the relationships within the
categories of the EFQM model. Total Qual. Manag. Bus. Excel. 2012, 6, 1–18. [CrossRef]
33. Baumgartner, R.; Ebner, D. Corporate sustainability strategies: Sustainability profiles and maturity levels.
Sustain. Dev. 2010, 18, 76–89. [CrossRef]
34. Harmon, J.; Fairfield, K.; Behson, S. A comparative analysis of organizational sustainability strategy:
Antecedents and performance outcomes perceived by U.S. and Non-U.S. based managers. In Proceedings of
the International Eastern Academy of Management Conference, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 21–25 June 2009.
35. Millar, C.; Hind, P.; Magala, S. Sustainability and the need for change: Organizational change and
transformational vision. J. Organ. Chang. Manag. 2012, 25, 489–497. [CrossRef]
36. Haudan, J. Successful strategy execution takes people—Not paper. Employ. Relat. Today 2007, 33, 38–39.
[CrossRef]
37. Martin, R. The execution trap. Drawing a line between strategy and execution almost guarantees failure.
Harv. Bus. Rev. 2010, 88, 64–71, 168.
38. Sterling, J. Translating strategy into effective implementation: Dispelling the myths and highlighting what
works. Strat. Leadersh. 2003, 31, 32–33. [CrossRef]
39. Cocks, G. Emerging concepts for implementing strategy. TQM J. 2010, 22, 262. [CrossRef]
40. Sabourin, V. Through the lenses of strategy execution: Obstacles in engineering management.
Leadersh. Manag. Eng. 2012, 12, 54. [CrossRef]
41. Araújo, M.; Sampaio, P. The path to excellence of the Portuguese organisations recognised by the EFQM
model. Total Qual. Manag. Bus. Excel. 2014, 25, 427–438. [CrossRef]
42. Siebenhüner, B.; Arnold, M. Organizational learning to manage sustainable development. Bus. Strat. Environ.
2007, 16, 339–353. [CrossRef]
43. How hierarchy can hurt strategy execution. Harv. Bus. Rev. 2010, 7–8, 74–75.
44. Morgan, J. Strategy execution a four-step process. MWorld Winter 2010, 9, 14.
45. Arjaliès, D.-L.; Mundy, J. The use of management control systems to manage CSR strategy: A levers of
control perspective. J. Manag. Account. Res. 2013, 24, 284–300. [CrossRef]
46. Hülsmann, M.; Grapp, J. Recursivity and dilemmas of a sustainable strategy management—New visions for
a corporate balancing efficiency and sustainability by autonomous co-operation in decision making processes.
In Foresight Management in Corporations and Public Organisations—New Visions for Sustainability,
Proceedings of the 7th Annual International Conference Foresight Management in Corporations and Public
Organisations, Helsinki, Finland, 9–10 June 2005; pp. 1–15.
439
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15847–15856
47. Coon, B.;Wolf, S. The alchemy of strategy execution. Employ. Relat. Today 2005, 32, 29–30. [CrossRef]
48. Hrebiniak, L. Making Strategy Work: Leading Effective Execution and Change; Pearson Education: Upper Saddle
River, NJ, USA, 2005.
49. Figge, F.; Hahn, T.; Schaltegger, S.; Wagner, M. The sustainability balanced scorecard—Linking sustainability
management to business strategy. Bus. Strat. Env. 2002, 11, 268–284. [CrossRef]
50. Nathan, M. ‘Lighting tomorrow with today’: Towards a (strategic) sustainability revolution. Int. J. Sustain.
Strat. Manag. 2010, 2, 29–40. [CrossRef]
51. Saunders, M.; Mann, R. Implementing strategic initiatives: A framework of leading practices. Int. J. Oper.
Prod. Manag. 2008, 28, 1104–1106. [CrossRef]
52. Ramsey, R. Strategic management: Formulation, implementation, and control in a dynamic environment.
Int. J. Commer. Manag. 2010, 20, 188–189. [CrossRef]
53. Kaplan, R.; Norton, D. The strategy map: Guide to aligning intangible assets. Strat. Leadersh. 2004, 32, 10–17.
[CrossRef]
54. Free, C.; Qu, S. The use of graphics in promoting management ideas: An analysis of the balanced scorecard,
1992–2010. J. Account. Organ. Chang. 2011, 7, 158–189. [CrossRef]
55. Lee, M.-D. Configuration of external influences: The combined effects of institutions and stakeholders on
corporate social responsibility strategies. J. Bus. Ethics 2011, 102, 281–298. [CrossRef]
56. Van Marrewijk, M.; Werre, M. Multiple levels of corporate sustainability. J. Bus. Ethics 2003, 44, 107–119.
[CrossRef]
57. White, P. Building a sustainability strategy into the business. Corp. Gov. Int. J. Bus. Soc. 2009, 9, 386–394.
© 2015 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
440
sustainability
Article
Repetitive Model Refinement for Questionnaire
Design Improvement in the Evaluation of Working
Characteristics in Construction Enterprises
Jeng-Wen Lin 1,*, Pu Fun Shen 2 and Bing-Jean Lee 1
1 Department of Civil Engineering, Feng Chia University, Taichung 407, Taiwan; bjlee@fcu.edu.tw
2 Ph.D. Program in Civil and Hydraulic Engineering, Feng Chia University, Taichung 407, Taiwan;
p0043264@fcu.edu.tw
* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; jwlin@fcu.edu.tw; Tel: +886-4-2451-7250 (ext. 3150);
Fax: +886-4-2451-6982.
Academic Editors: Adam Jabło ´ nski and Marc A. Rosen
Received: 15 July 2015; Accepted: 11 November 2015; Published: 17 November 2015
Abstract: This paper presents an iterative confidence interval based parametric refinement approach
for questionnaire design improvement in the evaluation of working characteristics in construction
enterprises. This refinement approach utilizes the 95% confidence interval of the estimated
parameters of the model to determine their statistical significance in a least-squares regression
setting. If this confidence interval of particular parameters covers the zero value, it is statistically
valid to remove such parameters from the model and their corresponding questions from the
designed questionnaire. The remaining parameters repetitively undergo this sifting process until
their statistical significance cannot be improved. This repetitive model refinement approach is
implemented in efficient questionnaire design by using both linear series and Taylor series models
to remove non-contributing questions while keeping significant questions that are contributive to
the issues studied, i.e., employees’ work performance being explained by their work values and
cadres’ organizational commitment being explained by their organizational management. Reducing
the number of questions alleviates the respondent burden and reduces costs. The results show that
the statistical significance of the sifted contributing questions is decreased with a total mean relative
change of 49%, while the Taylor series model increases the R-squared value by 17% compared with
the linear series model.
Keywords: confidence interval; construction enterprises; questionnaire design; repetitive model
refinement; statistical significance; working characteristics evaluation
1. Introduction
The questionnaire approach is widely used for surveying and collecting sample data with regard
to an issue, with a list of questions to be answered and the results aggregated for statistical analysis.
However, the main factors or questions influencing the findings of the models used need to be validated
and simplified for efficient questionnaire design. In order to acquire accurate evaluations of working
characteristics in construction enterprises and to alleviate problems of relatively large-dimensional
and nonlinear models, this study develops a confidence interval based repetitive parametric model
refinement approach for questionnaire design improvement.
1.1. General Information about the Questionnaires
A total of 250 questionnaires were distributed to Taiwanese and Chinese employees of two ranks
in the company being studied. After excluding 30 invalid questionnaires (being incomplete or with
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15179–15193; doi:10.3390/su71115179 441 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15179–15193
missing values, or regarded as “outliers” through a set a mathematical analysis) and 39 unreturned
ones, a total of 181 questionnaires were valid. The response rate was 72.4%.
1.2. Questionnaire Design Improvement
Questionnaire surveys are a widely used method to collect opinions and views. A customized
questionnaire is developed based on the parameters revealed by context immersion in a given field
(Kim [1]). However, many factors such as tedious design formats (Saris [2], Saris and Gallhofer [3]),
redundant content, and excessive length (Weimiao and Zheng [4]) may lead to an inconsistent
comparison matrix for the decision problem. Invalid or bad results from a questionnaire survey
may cause decision makers to make faulty inferences (Ergu and Kou [5]). Suzuki et al. [6] introduced
procedures to design reasonable questionnaires using statistical analysis to obtain high accuracy.
Reducing the length of a survey by using a more streamlined set of questions can lead to more
reasonable data being acquired and to better explanations of the issues in question. Other examples of
this approach include Edwards et al. [7], who reduced the effective sample size and introduced bias.
Finding ways to increase response rates to postal questionnaires would improve the quality of health
research. Landsheer and Boeije [8] used qualitative facet analysis, an application of Guttmann’s facet
theory, to investigate whether item content sufficiently covered the intended subject area. This form
of content analysis constitutes a systematic, effective, and critical tool for improving the content of
questionnaires. Jacqui et al. [9] improved questionnaire design by enabling iterations of qualitative and
quantitative testing, evaluation, and redevelopment. Results from such tests enable evidence-based
decisions to be made regarding trade-offs between measurement error, processing error, non-response
error, respondent burden, and costs. By enabling targeted improvements at the questionnaire design
level according to specific needs, we can create valuable reference resources (Xu et al. [10]).
1.3. Model Refinement and Repetitive Computation
To alleviate problems of respondent burden and costs as well as relatively large-dimensional and
nonlinear models, the issue of model refinement has increasingly drawn much attention in many fields.
Smith [11] addressed the study of algorithms and system designs. Adrian [12] presented a refinement
process with respect to data list building using model generators. Kapova and Goldschmidt [13]
proposed model-driven application engineering based on the concept of analytical transformations.
Liu [14] established two optimization models for a wireless optical communication system based on a
four-level pulse amplitude modulation scheme. Ragnhild et al. [15] explored the behavior inheritance
consistency of both refined and re-factored models with respect to the original model. Steven et al. [16]
addressed model refinement as an iterative process. Zhuquan et al. [17] proposed that measurements
permitted the repeated application of a system identification procedure operating on closed-loop data,
together with successive refinements of the designed controller.
1.4. Nonlinear Models and Statistical Confidence Intervals
A nonlinear model is often adopted in system applications. Khorshid and Alfares [18] developed
a parameter identification technique in creating a mathematical model of vehicle components by
solving an inverse problem using a non-linear optimization method. Lin and Chen [19] proposed a
statistical confidence interval based nonlinear parameter refinement approach and applied it to the
standard power series model (Lin [20], Lin and Betti [21]) for the identification of structural systems.
Other statistical confidence interval based studies include Tryon [22], who employed a graphical
inference confidence interval approach in analyzing independent and dependent approaches for
statistical difference, equivalence, replication, indeterminacy, and trivial difference. Yang et al. [23]
proposed control limits based on the narrowest confidence interval to analyze problems, if the
traditional three-sigma control limits or probability limits were adopted and some points with relatively
high probability of occurrence were excluded; yet, some points with relatively small probability of
occurrence may still be accepted in asymmetrical or multimodal distributions. Bonett and Price [24]
442
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15179–15193
proposed an adjusted Wald interval for paired binomial proportions that was shown to perform as
well as the best available methods. In construction management, it has been shown to be feasible
to use nonlinear models to deal with construction cost overruns (Ahiaga-Dagbui and Smith [25],
Anastasopoulos et al. [26]) and schedule forecasting patterns (Kim and Kim [27], Patel and Jha [28]).
1.5. Prime Novelty Statement
In contrast with the conventional tests of reliability and validity, the designed questionnaires in
this study were analyzed to identify the main factors and associated questions influencing the model
studied using the proposed repetitive model refinement approach so as to streamline the number of
questions in surveys of working characteristics in construction enterprises. Problems of respondent
burden and costs as well as relatively large-dimensional and nonlinear models were thus alleviated.
To reduce the number of questions with a more streamlined set, it was feasible to refine the model
by repetitively removing non-contributing questions. Each time non-contributing questions were
removed, the questionnaire model would be updated and rerun once again in a multiple regression
setting. This model refinement approach for the content validity of the questionnaire was implemented
using both linear and Taylor series models by conserving significant questions that were contributive
to the issue being studied, i.e., employees’ work performance explained by their work values and
cadres’ organizational commitment explained by their organizational management. The results have
been verified by calculating the statistical significance values of the sifted contributing questions and
the R-squared values of established models.
2. Questionnaires Evaluating Working Characteristics in Construction Enterprises
In this study, the research subjects of the questionnaires were the Taiwanese employees and
cadres of Taiwan-based construction enterprises in China. Questionnaire findings of similarities
and differences in work values, work satisfaction, organizational management, and organizational
commitment were preliminarily reviewed. The effects of work values and organizational management
on work satisfaction and organizational commitment, respectively, were analyzed using questionnaires
based on the job diagnostic survey by Hackman and Oldham [29]. The “working characteristics
questionnaires” included questionnaires for (1) work values; (2) work performance and satisfaction;
(3) organizational management; and (4) organizational commitment and identification (Lin and
Shen [30], Shen [31]).
3. Repetitive Model Refinement Approach and Analyses
Questionnaire data were used in multiple regression analyses using four models, comprising the
linear series, the refined linear series, the Taylor series, and the refined Taylor series model, where for
the employees’ part the independent variables are X = work values, which are used to explain the
dependent variables Y = work performance and satisfaction; and for the cadres’ part, X = organizational
management, used to explain Y = organizational commitment and identification.
Two linear regression models were generated to identify the causal links between work values and
work performance on the one hand, and organizational management and organizational commitment
on the other. The original linear series model was refined through an iterative approach. This
refined model was developed to streamline the questionnaire by removing non-contributing questions.
The Taylor series model expanded the original linear series model up to the third moments. As a
consequence, the R-squared value in the regression setting was increased. The refined Taylor series
model was obtained from the original Taylor series model by the repetitive refinement approach in a
regression setting. It was thus feasible to obtain the R-squared values of the regression between X and
Y defined above and the mean relative change of the statistical significance as two indicators of result
verification, so as to prove the accuracy of the refined model and to validate the sifted questions as
genuinely significant contributors to the refined model.
443
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15179–15193
The iterative refinement approach provides for the sifting of model components and related
questions by repetitively using the 95% confidence interval in a regression setting. The 95% confidence
interval is selected by convention and because the higher confidence interval enables more stringent
selection of the components and thus a lower possibility of incorporating nonlinear elements, which
is generally problematic for systems with a degree of nonlinear behavior; such nonlinearity will be
verified in the results, showing the nonlinear Taylor series model significantly increases the R-squared
value when compared with the linear series model. If the estimated confidence interval of a parameter
contains the “null” (zero) value, it is statistically valid to remove such a parameter and its corresponding
component, while maintaining those parameters whose confidence intervals do not cover the zero
value. This component/question sifting process is repeated by rerunning the regression and refining
the model until none of the estimated 95% confidence intervals of the remaining parameters cover the
zero value (Lin and Chen [19]). In addition, the interval method proposed in this article has proved
more reasonable than the mean value method. Using the interval method considers an interval which
covers zero or not. However, using the mean value method to remove those close to zero values has a
problem; i.e., what values are “close” to zero (e.g., 10−10, 10−20, or 10−30, etc.)?
The employees’ section of the questionnaire data is used in this study to demonstrate the model
refinement approach using 95% confidence intervals in a regression. Using question Ey1 (“I think
my work ability is excellent”) as an example to show the model refinement approach, we assign
Y = Ey1 in the questionnaire for employees’ work performance and satisfaction, while X = Ex1–24,
being all 24 questions in the questionnaire for employees’ work values. In other words, the question
Ey1 is explained by the questions Ex1–24. The consequent repetitive sifting process to select the real
contributing components/questions out of the 24 questions (Ex1–24) to Ey1 is listed in Tables 1–4
(adapted from Lin and Shen [30], Shen [31]). Each table presents the outcome of a new regression after
the component sifting process. Each of the highlighted upper and lower bounds for a given component
indicates that the 95% confidence interval covers the zero value in the regression analysis.
Removing those components/questions with 95% confidence intervals covering the zero value
in the regression setting of Table 1 and rerunning a new regression of the remaining components
leads to Table 2. Continuing this repetitive sifting process by rerunning the regression analysis for the
remaining components in Table 2 we obtain Table 3. By the same component sifting process, Table 4
is derived from Table 3. The 95% confidence interval for each remaining component in Table 4 does
not cover the zero value, implying that the remaining components are genuine contributing factors in
explaining the component Ey1. Hence, it is statistically valid to stop the component sifting process
at this point. It is noteworthy that the significance value of each remaining component from Table 2
to Table 4 decreases in average a new regression is conducted in the repetitive refinement approach.
The removed components correspond to relatively high significance values while the remaining
components correspond to successively declining significance values in each round of regression.
Table 1. Multiple regression of original questionnaire model.
R-square = 0.410 [95% Conf. Interval]
Ey1 I think my work ability is excellent. Lower
Bound
Upper
Bound Significance
Ex1 New knowledge and technologies can be learned at work. −0.54 0.732 0.761
Ex2 There are chances for advanced studies at work. −0.657 0.458 0.719
Ex3 My own dream can be realized at work. −0.394 0.36 0.929
Ex4 The quality of my life can be improved through my work. −0.502 −0.244 0.486
Ex5 My life becomes richer due to my work. −0.476 −0.204 0.421
Ex6 I can have the sense of achievement at work. 0.126 0.612 0.19
Ex7 My boss at work is very understanding. 0.69 0.284 0.402
Ex8 My colleagues always take care of each other. 0.285 0.802 0.34
Ex9 My colleagues never attack each other for their own benefits. −0.472 0.502 0.95
Ex10 My colleagues get along with each other well. −0.45 0.36 0.821
444
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15179–15193
Table 1. Cont.
R-square = 0.410 [95% Conf. Interval]
Ex11 I can work in an environment which is not harmful to my body
and mind. 0.152 0.499 0.683
Ex12 I can arrange my own schedule properly because of the
flexibility of my work. 0.203 1.025 0.183
Ex13 When I am sick, the company takes good care of me. 0.845 2.044 0.404
Ex14 The insurance system of the company is good. −1.654 2.033 0.836
Ex15 I can get a raise or bonus of a proper amount. −2.445 −1.391 0.58
Ex16 The welfare system of the company is good. 0.145 2.375 0.605
Ex17 My income is higher than that of others with the same
conditions as me.
−3.329 −1.822 0.556
Ex18 I never feel confused or scared while working. 0.371 1.672 0.204
Ex19 There are many chances of promotion. −1.107 −0.416 0.362
Ex20 I devote myself to my work. −0.841 0.757 0.916
Ex21 Even if there is no extra pay for working overtime, I would still
work overtime to finish my work at night.
−0.529 0.69 0.79
Ex22 I usually go to work earlier to prepare the tasks I have to handle. −0.474 0.642 0.762
Ex23 I am proud of my work. 0.189 1.407 0.13
Ex24 I want to be perfect when it comes to my work. −2.01 −0.193 0.019
Table 2. Multiple regression of the refined questionnaire model in the first round.
R-square = 0.399 [95% Conf. Interval]
Ey1 I think my work ability is excellent. Lower
bound
Upper
bound Significance
Ex4 The quality of my life can be improved through my work −0.43 −0.174 0.398
Ex5 My life becomes richer due to my work. −0.384 −0.177 0.461
Ex6 I can have the sense of achievement at work. 0.109 0.431 0.235
Ex7 My boss at work is very understanding. 0.499 0.176 0.339
Ex8 My colleagues always take care of each other. 0.156 0.591 0.247
Ex11 I can work in an environment which is not harmful to my body
and mind.
−0.651 0.356 0.558
Ex12 I can arrange my own schedule properly because of the
flexibility of my work. 0.131 0.814 0.152
Ex13 When I am sick, the company takes good care of me. 0.566 1.852 0.289
Ex15 I can get a raise or bonus of a proper amount. −1.991 −1.038 0.529
Ex16 The welfare system of the company is good. −0.888 2.231 0.39
Ex17 My income is higher than that of others with the same
conditions as me.
−3.244 −0.951 0.276
Ex18 I never feel confused or scared while working. 0.117 1.647 0.087
Ex19 There are many chances of promotion. −1.105 −0.174 0.149
Ex23 I am proud of my work. 0.107 1.113 0.104
Ex24 I want to be perfect when it comes to my work. −1.674 −0.362 0.003
445
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15179–15193
Table 3. Multiple regression of the refined questionnaire model in the second round.
R-square = 0.395 [95% Conf. Interval]
Ey1 I think my work ability is excellent. Lower
bound
Upper
bound Significance
Ex4 The quality of my life can be improved through my work. −0.44 −0.15 0.327
Ex5 My life becomes richer due to my work. −0.386 −0.153 0.387
Ex6 I can have the sense of achievement at work. 0.084 0.446 0.176
Ex7 My boss at work is very understanding. 0.463 0.197 0.42
Ex8 My colleagues always take care of each other. 0.189 0.529 0.345
Ex12 I can arrange my own schedule properly because of the
flexibility of my work. 0.076 0.645 0.119
Ex13 When I am sick, the company takes good care of me. 0.499 1.874 0.249
Ex15 I can get a raise or bonus of a proper amount. −2.109 −0.823 0.381
Ex17 My income is higher than that of others with the same
conditions as me.
−2.258 0.771 0.426
Ex18 I never feel confused or scared while working. 0.03 1.694 0.058
Ex19 There are many chances of promotion. −1.12 −0.141 0.125
Ex23 I am proud of my work. 0.103 1.05 0.105
Ex24 I want to be perfect when it comes to my work. −1.633 −0.39 0.002
Table 4. Multiple regression of the refined questionnaire model in the third round.
R-square = 0.392 [95% Conf. Interval]
Ey1 I think my work ability is excellent. Lower
bound
Upper
bound Significance
Ex4 The quality of my life can be improved through my work. −0.452 −0.128 0.267
Ex5 My life becomes richer due to my work. −0.394 −0.139 0.341
Ex6 I can have the sense of achievement at work. 0.088 0.439 0.186
Ex7 My boss at work is very understanding. 0.473 0.18 0.372
Ex8 My colleagues always take care of each other. 0.206 0.5 0.405
Ex12 I can arrange my own schedule properly because of the
flexibility of my work. 0.074 0.645 0.117
Ex13 When I am sick, the company takes good care of me. 0.582 1.55 0.065
Ex15 I can get a raise or bonus of a proper amount. −2.21 −0.409 0.173
Ex18 I never feel confused or scared while working. 0.089 1.453 0.082
Ex19 There are many chances of promotion. −1.015 −0.134 0.17
Ex23 I am proud of my work. 0.058 1.076 0.077
Ex24 I want to be perfect when it comes to my work. −1.629 −0.392 0.002
4. Results and Verifications
4.1. Statistical Significance of Question
The relative change of the statistical significance value before and after each round of the repetitive
refinement approach in the regression setting is defined as:
x f
j
− xi
j
xi
j
(1)
where x f
j denotes the final statistical significance value for the jth component of the model, while xi
j
denotes the initial statistical significance value for the jth component of the model. The statistical
significance is defined as follows: If the p-value is less than or equal to alpha, we say that the data
are statistically significant at level alpha. In statistics (where “significant” means “corresponds to a
real difference in fact”) the term is used to indicate only that the evidence against the null hypothesis
reaches the standard set by alpha (Moore and McCabe [32]). Since the lower the significance value
446
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15179–15193
of a component the higher will be its contribution to the model, a negative value for the relative
change of the statistical significance in Equation (1) signifies that the effect of the corresponding
component/question on the model is increased, while the opposite is true for the case of a positive
value. Tables 5 and 6 list the relative change of the statistical significance as a percentage (%) for each
question of Ey explained by Ex1–24 and for each question of Cy explained by Cx1–8, respectively.
Table 5. Employees’ part: relative change of the statistical significance for each question of Ey explained
by Ex1–24.
Work Values
Work Satisfaction
Ey1 Ey2 Ey3 Ey4 Ey5 Ey6 Ey7 Ey8 Ey9 Ey10
Ex1 −34% −50% −38% −97% −19% −90%
Ex2 42% −50% −59% −17%
Ex3 −13% −28% −20% −37%
Ex4 −45% 20% −77% −74% −77% −28% −32%
Ex5 −19% −1% −47% −55% 0.3%
Ex6 −2% −45% −64% −21%
Ex7 −7% −59% −56% −42% −46%
Ex8 19% −80% −26% −90% −0.3% −72%
Ex9 −31% −20% −66% −44% −50%
Ex10 −17% −13% −8%
Ex11 −74% −48% −67% −27% −58% −100%
Ex12 −36% −71% −58% −43% −61% −38%
Ex13 −84% −70% −15% −69% −7% −14%
Ex14 −31% −70% −32% −24% −51% −23%
Ex15 −70% −85% −48% −8% −2% −12%
Ex16 −79% −59%
Ex17 −94% −100% −21% −97% −81%
Ex18 −78% −27% −71% −25%
Ex19 −53% −4% −70% −42%
Ex20 −13% −6% −34% −30%
Ex21 −44% −37% −17% −55%
Ex22 −91% −28% −50% −20% −77% −97% −74%
Ex23 −41% −15% −56% −61% −46% −60%
Ex24 −89% −31% −40% −38% −84% −58% −49%
Mean change −41% −48% −37% −37% −57% −48% −42% −47% −46%
Total Mean Change −45%
Table 6. Cadres’ part: relative change of the statistical significance for each question of Cy explained
by Cx1–8.
Organizational
management
Organizational
commitment
Cy1 Cy2 Cy3 Cy4 Cy5 Cy6 Cy7 Cy8 Cy9 Cy10
Cx1 −68% −56% −40% −74% −57% 0% −5% −72%
Cx2 −85% −7% −64% −25% −83% 0% −33% −91% −27%
Cx3 −91% −83% −53% 0% −33% −92% −11%
Cx4 −96% −98% −74% −60% 0% −35% −93% −11%
Cx5 −88% −48% −53% 0% 12% −37%
Cx6 −45% −42% 0% −19% −2%
Cx7 −48% −74% −69% −40% 0% −35% −93%
Cx8 1% −85% −39% −36% 0% −92% −95%
Mean change −84% −39% −66% −71% −52% −54% 0% −21% −92% −36%
Total mean change −52%
In Table 5, a blank indicates that the question used to explain the corresponding question Ey in
a model has been removed. All the questions used to explain the question Ey3 have been removed,
implying that Ey3 (“My boss thinks I am doing a great job at work”) has nothing to do with any
of the questions relating Ex1–24. Such a question should be removed to improve questionnaire
design for accurate evaluations of working characteristics. It is clear that all the significance values
of the remaining questions are decreased except for the four marked values. Such a decrease in the
447
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15179–15193
significance value refers to the increase of the effect of the question on a model, verifying that the
remaining questions are the real contributing questions/factors for the refined model. The total mean
relative change of the statistical significance of the remaining variables is −45%.
Similarly in Table 6, a blank indicates that the question used to explain the corresponding question
Cy in a model has been removed. Again, the significance values of the remaining questions are clearly
decreased except for the two marked values. Such a decrease in the significance value verifies that the
remaining questions are the real contributing questions/factors to the refined model. The total mean
relative change of the statistical significance of the remaining variables is −52%. In particular, the
question Cy7 “Staying and working for this company doesn’t do me any good” needs to be explained by
all eight questions Cx1–8 relating to organizational management. In other words, choosing whether to
stay and work for the company depends on the entire range of the company’s management strategies.
4.2. R-Squared Value of Regression Analysis
In the regression setting, the final R-squared value of each Ey for the employees’ part through the
repetitive refinement approach implemented in the linear series, refined linear series, Taylor series,
and refined Taylor series models is listed in Table 7 (adapted from Lin and Shen [30], Shen [31]). The
total mean R-squared value is decreased by 0.02 for the refined linear series model from the linear
series model, signifying that the model refinement approach developed here cannot truly affect the
R-squared value when searching for the genuinely contributory questions for survey improvement.
On the other hand, the Taylor series model increases the mean R-squared value by 0.19 from the linear
series model, which greatly improves the modeling process in the multiple regression setting.
Table 7. Employees’ part: Final R-squared values for linear series, refined linear series, Taylor series,
and refined Taylor series models.
X =Work Values Y = Work Performance and
Satisfaction
Linear
Series
Refined
Linear Series
Taylor
Series
Refined Taylor
Series
Ey1 I think my work ability is excellent. 0.41 0.392 0.593 0.533
Ey2 I can always finish my work rapidly on time. 0.407 0.366 0.624 0.562
Ey3 My boss thinks I am doing a great job at work. 0.285 0.208 0.389 0.26
Ey4 My professional knowledge is enough to do
my job. 0.46 0.449 0.684 0.638
Ey5 I am highly cooperative with my team. 0.314 0.302 0.521 0.479
Ey6 I am very satisfied with the welfare provided
by the company I work for. 0.555 0.53 0.692 0.632
Ey7
I am very satisfied with what this job has to
offer to help improving my future
development.
0.521 0.499 0.743 0.694
Ey8 I am very satisfied with my salary. 0.493 0.487 0.699 0.656
Ey9 I am very satisfied with my relationships with
my colleagues. 0.495 0.481 0.708 0.661
Ey10 I am very satisfied with the opportunities and
the system of promotion. 0.531 0.524 0.713 0.663
Overall mean per model 0.44 0.42 0.63 0.57
Similarly, the final R-squared value of each Cy for the cadres’ part obtained by the repetitive
refinement approach in the linear series, refined linear series, Taylor series, and refined Taylor series
models is listed in Table 8 (adapted from Lin and Shen [30], Shen [31]). The total mean R-squared
value is again decreased by 0.02 for the refined linear series model. The Taylor series model on average
increases the R-squared value by 0.17 from the linear series model, greatly improving the modeling
process. In Table 8, all the questions implemented in the Taylor series model achieve high R-squared
values of greater than 0.85, implying a satisfactory result in modeling the causal explanations for
questionnaire design.
448
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15179–15193
Table 8. Cadres’ part: Final R-squared values for linear series, refined linear series, Taylor series, and
refined Taylor series models.
X = Organizational Management Y = Organizational
Commitment and Identification
Linear
Series
Refined
Linear Series
Taylor
Series
Refined Taylor
Series
Cy1 I care about the future development of the
company. 0.785 0.757 0.942 0.879
Cy2 In order to stay employed by the company, I
am willing to accept any assignment. 0.723 0.681 0.911 0.793
Cy3 In order to help the company to be successful, I
am willing to pay extra efforts. 0.757 0.753 0.934 0.848
Cy4
It doesn’t matter to work for another company
as long as job content and conditions are
similar.
0.724 0.692 0.894 0.817
Cy5 I think the company I work for is a good
company, and it’s worthy to work hard for it. 0.769 0.765 0.938 0.842
Cy6 The style of this company is close to my values. 0.797 0.772 0.956 0.844
Cy7 Staying and working for this company doesn’t
do me any good. 0.97 0.97 0.999 0.999
Cy8 I would leave this company as long as my job
status is slightly changed. 0.647 0.613 0.854 0.768
Cy9 I can identify myself with the company’s policy
for its employees. 0.781 0.771 0.939 0.897
Cy10 I am glad that I decided to take this job instead
of others. 0.656 0.653 0.859 0.753
Overall mean per model 0.76 0.74 0.93 0.84
4.3. Reliability and Validity
Verifications and error analyses were also conducted to compare the above results using the
repetitive model refinement approach with those using methods of reliability and validity.
This study adopted Cronbach’s alpha to represent the reliability in data analysis. Guieford [33]
proposed a set of criteria for Cronbach’s alpha. The standard value of Cronbach’s alpha is 0.5. High
alpha values (>0.7) mean high reliability while low ones (<0.35) mean low reliability. Table 9 shows
that through the repetitive model refinement approach the number of questions was reduced and all
the reliabilities were over 0.7, indicating that the sample was adequately stable and consistent.
Table 9. Reliability analyses.
Before deleting questions After deleting questions
Employees’ work values Cronbach’s alpha = 0.623 Cronbach’s alpha = 0.720
Employees’ work performance and satisfaction Cronbach’s alpha = 0.577 Cronbach’s alpha = 0.742
Cadres’ organizational management Cronbach’s alpha = 0.565 Cronbach’s alpha = 0.740
Cadres’ organizational commitment and identification Cronbach’s alpha = 0.590 Cronbach’s alpha = 0.780
Validity in SPSS on the other hand means “exploratory factor analysis” (according to SPSS online
help), whose main features are the following tests:
(1) Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin (KMO) measure of sampling adequacy tests whether the partial correlations
among variables are small (KMO > 0.6);
(2) Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity tests the null hypothesis that the correlation matrix is an identity
matrix, indicating that the factor model is inappropriate (Sig < 0.05);
(3) SPSS analysis defines communality as the proportion of a parameter’s variance that is explained
by the factor structure.
This repetitive model refinement approach thus reduces the number of questions and can be
shown to promote communality significantly; this also indicates that validity was not reduced after
questions had been deleted, as illustrated in Table 10.
449
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15179–15193
Table 10. Exploratory factor analysis.
Before Deleting Questions After Deleting Questions
Employees’ work values
KMO = 0.816 KMO = 0.772
Bartlett Test Sig = 0.03 Bartlett Test Sig = 0.01
Communality = 0.768 Communality = 0.811
Employees’ work performance
and satisfaction
KMO = 0.763 KMO = 0.733
Bartlett Test Sig = 0.01 Bartlett Test Sig = 0.00
Communality = 0.798 Communality = 0.828
Cadres’ organizational
management
KMO = 0.741 KMO = 0.709
Bartlett Test Sig = 0.00 Bartlett Test Sig = 0.00
Communality = 0.739 Communality = 0.801
Cadres’ organizational
commitment and identification
KMO = 0.712 KMO = 0.700
Bartlett Test Sig = 0.01 Bartlett Test Sig = 0.01
Communality = 0.754 Communality = 0.799
5. Conclusions
This study is consistent with sustainable development issues, dealing with four areas: employees’
work values; employees’ work performance and satisfaction; cadres’ organizational management;
and cadres’ organizational commitment and identification. The questionnaire data are available for
reference and for enterprises’ development. In addition, the questionnaire design improvement can
assist researchers to design more precise and effective questionnaires. In this study, an effective
repetitive model refinement approach using 95% confidence intervals in a multiple regression setting
has been applied to the analysis of questionnaire design improvement for evaluating working
characteristics in construction enterprises. Such an approach sifts components/questions by removing
non-contributing questions of the model, inducing only a 2% decrease in the model’s corresponding
R-squared value, while keeping the genuinely contributory questions of the model for questionnaire
design improvement. This not only reduces the time to complete the questionnaire in surveys, but also
reduces the cost of production of the questionnaire. The results prove that the developed Taylor series
model significantly increases the R-squared value by 17% when compared with the linear series model.
After repeatedly running the screening process of the estimated parameters, almost all the remaining
questions of the model for both the employees’ and cadres’ sections show decreased significance values
with a total mean relative change of 49%, verifying that the remaining questions are indeed the real
contributing ones to the models studied. In particular, the question “My boss thinks I am doing a
great job at work” in evaluating employees’ work performance cannot be successfully explained by
the contents of the questionnaire relating to employee work values. Such a question should instead
be evaluated by a manager within the repetitive model refinement approach. However, the question
“Staying and working for this company doesn’t do me any good” can be evaluated through the full
content of the questionnaire relating to organizational management. In other words, an employee’s
decision to stay in the company is substantially dependent on the company’s management strategies.
Further, limitations of the study indicate that the developed questionnaire design improvement should
be applied to data with high reliability.
Acknowledgments: The work described in this paper comprises part of the research project sponsored by Feng
Chia University (Contract No. 14I42315), whose support is greatly appreciated.
Author Contributions: Jeng-Wen Lin designed the research and wrote the paper; Pu Fun Shen performed research
and analyzed the data; and Bing-Jean Lee revised the paper.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Kim, M.J. A framework for context immersion in mobile augmented reality. Autom. Constr. 2013, 33, 79–85.
[CrossRef]
2. Saris, W.E. Questionnaire Design. 2014. Available online: http://link.springer.com/referenceworkentry/10.
1007%2F978-94-007-0753-5_2392#page-1 (accessed on 12 November 2015).
450
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15179–15193
3. Saris,W.E.; Gallhofer, I.N. Design, Evaluation, and Analysis of Questionnaires for Survey Research. 2014.
Available online: https://books.google.com.tw/books?hl=zh-TW&lr=&id=NTKpAgAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=
PT12&ots=xHVXLPqMua&sig=Vfoid8qPqQZ2we861FwFBaI3Ccs&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false
(accessed on 12 November 2015).
4. Weimiao, F.; Zheng, Y. Factors Affecting Response Rates of theWeb Survey: A Systematic Review. Comput.
Hum. Behav. 2009, 26, 132–139.
5. Ergu, D.; Kou, G. Questionnaire Design Improvement and Missing Item Scores Estimation for Rapid and
Efficient Decision Making. Ann. Oper. Res. 2012, 197, 5–23. [CrossRef]
6. Suzuki, S.; Ando, M.; Hashimoto, H.; Asama, H. Design Procedure and Improvement of a Mathematical
Modeling to Estimate Customer Satisfaction. 2014. Available online: http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.
1007/978-4-431-54816-4_2#page-1 (accessed on 12 November 2015).
7. Edwards, P.J.; Roberts, I.; Clarke, M.J.; DiGuiseppi, C.; Wentz, R.; Kwan, I.; Cooper, R.; Felix, L.M.; Pratap, S.
Methods to Increase Response to Postal and Electronic Questionnaires. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 2009.
[CrossRef]
8. Landsheer, J.A.; Boeije, H.R. In Search of Content Validity: Facet Analysis as a Qualitative Method to Improve
Questionnaire Design An Application in Health Research. Qual. Quant. 2008, 44, 59–69. [CrossRef]
9. Jacqui, J.; Pete, B.; Sarah, W.; Jane, C. Improved Questionnaire Design Yields Better Data: Experiences
from the UK’s Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Establishment Survey (ICES–III), Montréal, QC, Canada, 18–21 June 2007.
10. Xu, S.; Zhou, S.; Cao, Q.; Lei, J.; Li, X.; He, Y. Questionnaire Design and Analysis of Online Teaching and
Learning: A Case Study of the Questionnaire of “Education Online” Platform of Beijing University of
Technology. 2014. Available online: http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-94-007-7618-0_419
(accessed on 12 November 2015).
11. Smith, D.R. Model Refinement: Calculating Refinements in Algorithm and System Design. 2009. Available
online: ftp://kestrel.edu/pub/papers/smith/mr.pdf (accessed on 12 November 2015).
12. Adrian, V. Performance Criteria for Software Metrics Model Refinement. J. Appl. Quant. Methods 2007, 2,
118–128.
13. Kapova, L.; Goldschmidt, T. Automated Feature Model-Based Generation of Refinement Transformations.
In Proceedings of the 2009 SEAA ‘09, 35th Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced
Applications, Patras, Greece, 27–29 August 2009; pp. 141–148.
14. Liu, X. Solution Refinement ofWireless Optical System Model with Multi-level Modulation. Electron. Lett.
2009, 45, 475–476. [CrossRef]
15. Ragnhild, V.D.S.; Viviane, J.; Tom, M. A Formal Approach to Model Refactoring and Model Refinement.
Softw. Syst. Model. 2005, 6, 139–162.
16. Steven, J.L.; Philip, R.B.; Chiu, W. EMAN: Semiautomated Software for High-Resolution Single-Particle
Reconstructions. J. Struct. Biol. 1999, 128, 82–97.
17. Zhuquan, Z.; Bitmead, R.R.; Gevers, M. H2 Iterative Model Refinement and Control Robustness Enhancement.
In Proceedings of the 30th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, Brighton, UK, 11–13 December 1991;
Volume 1, pp. 279–284.
18. Khorshid, E.; Alfares, M. Model Refinement and Experimental Evaluation for Optimal Design of Speed
Humps. Int. J. Veh. Syst. Model. Test. 2006, 2, 80–99. [CrossRef]
19. Lin, J.W.; Chen, H.J. Repetitive Identification of Structural Systems using a Nonlinear Model Parameter
Refinement Approach. Shock Vib. 2009, 16, 229–240. [CrossRef]
20. Lin, J.W. Adaptive Algorithms for the Identification of Nonlinear Structural Systems. Ph.D. Thesis, Columbia
University, New York, NY, USA, 2001.
21. Lin, J.W.; Betti, R. On-line Identification and Damage Detection in Non-linear Structural Systems using a
Variable Forgetting Factor Approach. Earthq. Eng. Struct. Dyn. 2004, 33, 419–444. [CrossRef]
22. Tryon, W.W. Evaluating Independent Proportions for Statistical Difference, Equivalence, Indeterminacy, and
Trivial Difference Using Inferential Confidence Intervals. J. Educ. Behav. Stat. 2009, 34, 171–189. [CrossRef]
23. Yang, J.; Xie, M.; Goh, T.N. Control Limits Based on the Narrowest Confidence Interval. Commun. Stat.
Theory Methods 2011, 40, 2172–2181. [CrossRef]
24. Bonett, D.G.; Price, R.M. Adjusted Wald Confidence Interval for a Difference of Binomial Proportions Based
on Paired Data. J. Educ. Behav. Stat. 2012, 37, 479–488. [CrossRef]
451
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15179–15193
25. Ahiaga-Dagbui, D.D.; Smith, S.D. Dealing with Construction Cost Overruns Using Data Mining. Constr.
Manag. Econ. 2014, 32, 682–694. [CrossRef]
26. Anastasopoulos, P.C.; Haddock, J.E.; Peeta, S. Cost Overrun in Public-Private Partnerships: Toward
Sustainable Highway Maintenance and Rehabilitation. 2014. Available online: http://ascelibrary.org/
doi/abs/10.1061/%28ASCE%29CO.1943-7862.0000854 (accessed on 12 November 2015).
27. Kim, B.C.; Kim, H.J. Sensitivity of Earned Value Schedule Forecasting to S-Curve Patterns. J. Constr. Eng.
Manag. 2014, 140, 04014023. Available online: http://ascelibrary.org/doi/10.1061/%28ASCE%29CO.1943-
7862.0000856 (accessed on 12 November 2015). [CrossRef]
28. Patel, D.A.; Jha, K.N. Neural Network Model for the Prediction of Safe Work Behavior in Construction
Projects. 2015. Available online: http://ascelibrary.org/doi/10.1061/%28ASCE%29CO.1943-7862.0000922
(accessed on 12 November 2015).
29. Hackman, J.R.; Oldham, G.R. Development of the Job Diagnostic Survey. J. Appl. Psychol. 1975, 60, 159–170.
[CrossRef]
30. Lin, J.W.; Shen, P.F. Factor-analysis Based Questionnaire Categorization Method for Reliability Improvement
of Evaluation of Working Conditions in Construction Enterprises. Struct. Eng. Mech. 2014, 51, 973–988.
[CrossRef]
31. Shen, P.F. Impact of Employees’ Work Values at Two Sides of Taiwan Straits on Corporate Performance.
Master’s Thesis, Feng Chia University, Taichung, Taiwan, 2011.
32. Moore, D.S.; McCabe, G.P. Introduction to the Practice of Statistics, 3rd ed.; W.H. Freeman and Company: New
York, NY, USA, 2000.
33. Guieford, J.P. Fundamental Statistics in Psychology and Education, 4th ed.; McGraw Hill: New York, NY,
USA, 1965.
© 2015 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
452
sustainability
Article
Development of an Innovation Model Based on a
Service-Oriented Product Service System (PSS)
Seungkyum Kim 1, Changho Son 2, Byungun Yoon 3 and Yongtae Park 1,*
1 Department of Industrial Engineering, Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-742,
Korea; hdglace8@snu.ac.kr
2 Department ofWeapon System Engineering, Korea Army Academy at Yeong-Cheon, 135-1 Changhari,
Young-Cheon, Gyeongbuk 770-849, Korea; c13981@snu.ac.kr
3 Department of Industrial & Systems Engineering, Dongguk University, Seoul 04620, Korea;
postman3@dongguk.edu
* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; parkyt1@snu.ac.kr; Tel./Fax: +82-2-878-3511
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 1 August 2015; Accepted: 20 October 2015; Published: 28 October 2015
Abstract: Recently, there have been many attempts to cope with increasingly-diversified and
ever-changing customer needs by combining products and services that are critical components
of innovation models. Although not only manufacturers, but also service providers, try to integrate
products and services, most of the previous studies on Product Service System (PSS) development
deal with how to effectively integrate services into products from the product-centric point of view.
Services provided by manufacturers’ PSSes, such as delivery services, training services, disposal
services, and so on, offer customers ancillary value, whereas products of service providers’ PSSes
enrich core value by enhancing the functionality and quality of the service. Thus, designing an
effective PSS development process from the service-centric point of view is an important research
topic. Accordingly, the purpose of this paper is to propose a service-oriented PSS development
process, which consists of four stages: (1) strategic planning; (2) idea generation and selection;
(3) service design; and (4) product development. In the proposed approach, the PSS development
project is initiated and led by a service provider from a service-centric point of view. From the
perspective of methodology, customer needs are converted into product functions according to
Quality Function Deployment (QFD), while Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) is employed to
prioritize the functions. Additionally, this paper illustrates a service-oriented PSS development that
demonstrates the application of the proposed process. The proposed process and illustration are
expected to serve as a foundation for research on service-oriented PSS development and as a useful
guideline for service providers who are considering the development of a service-oriented PSS.
Keywords: Product Service System (PSS); service-oriented PSS development process; English
education; Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP); Quality Function Deployment (QFD)
1. Introduction
Recently, customer needs have become increasingly diversified and ever-changing. Under
this circumstance, because it is very difficult to fulfill sophisticated customer needs by product
innovation alone, many attempts to overcome this problem have involved combining products and
services. In practice, companies, such as General Electric, Xerox, Canon, and Parkersell, have shown
a considerable increase in sales and profits from services since the mid-1990s [1]. Although such
companies had originally made profits by only selling products, they have maintained growth by
integrating services into their products. These attempts can be regarded as Product Service Systems
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449; doi:10.3390/su71114427 453 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
(PSS), which are firstly defined as a set of products and services that fulfills customer needs and has
lower environmental impact [2]. Most of the early studies on PSS focused on the environmental aspect.
However, the scope and concept of PSS have been expanded, as various studies on PSS have been
actively conducted. Nowadays, PSS is regarded as an integrated system of products and services to
provide customers with functions and value that they need [3]. Thus, it is one of the critical components
of innovation models that can create value on existing and new businesses.
Most of the previous studies on PSS are based on the viewpoint of manufacturers [4–11].
Particularly, studies on PSS development deal with how to effectively integrate services into products
from the product-centric point of view, and they focus on a specific phase, not the whole development
process. Low et al. [4] suggested an idea generation method using theory of solving inventive problem
(TRIZ) methodology, while Uchihira et al. [8] proposed a method that identifies PSS opportunities
along with product usage. Aurich et al. [6] and Yang et al. [11] utilized product life-cycle data for
idea generation and design of PSSes. In summary, there is a lack of research on PSS development
covering the whole development process, and it is rare to find PSS research conducted from the
service-centric point of view. However, service providers are also making attempts to integrate
products into their services for effective service deliveries and differentiated customer value. Amazon’s
Kindle is an example of this case. PSSes developed by manufacturers and service providers have
different characteristics in terms of customer value. Services of manufacturers’ PSSes, such as delivery
services, training services, disposal services, and so on, offer customers ancillary value instead of core
value that customers recognize when consuming the product, whereas products of service providers’
PSSes ensure that core value is enriched by enhancing functionality and quality of the service. In the
case of Kindle, e-book contents are instantly delivered with lower cost, easier access, and easier
payment; therefore, Kindle enriches the core value that Amazon has offered customers as an online
bookstore. Thus, a different approach for developing a service-centric PSS is required. Therefore,
designing an effective PSS development process from the service-centric point of view is an important
research topic.
Accordingly, this paper proposes a service-oriented PSS development process in which the
PSS development project is initiated and led by a service provider from a service-centric viewpoint
to generate a new innovation model. In contrast to a single product or service development, PSS
development is carried out by multiple actors, including manufacturers and service providers; hence,
the role of each actor should be defined clearly. In the proposed process, which consists of four
stages, the actor and its role are specified for each stage. Additionally, this paper introduces a real
PSS development case from the education industry sector, which demonstrates the application of the
proposed process and discusses the practical issues that can occur during the PSS development project.
The fact that the proposed process was applied to real business practices has practical significance
and, furthermore, this research could serve as a useful guideline for service providers to develop a
service-oriented PSS.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, the previous studies on
PSS development are reviewed, which build a foundation for the proposed approach. In Section 3,
a service-oriented PSS development process is proposed including the concept, framework, and
detailed processes. Section 4 introduces the case of service-oriented PSS development in detail.
Finally, this research ends with conclusions that include contributions, limitations and directions for
future research.
2. Literature Review
2.1. Definition of PSS
Recently, PSS has received much attention from both industry and academia. Accordingly, active
research regarding PSS is underway. Goedkoop et al. [2] initially suggested the PSS concept, which
is defined as “a system of products, services, networks of players, and supporting infrastructure
454
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
that continuously strives to be competitive, satisfy customer needs and have a lower environmental
impact than traditional innovation models” [2]. On the other hand, Wong [12] defined PSS as follows;
“Product Service-Systems (PSS) may be defined as a solution offered for sale that involves both a
product and a service element, to deliver the required functionality”, which was not limited to the
environmental impact. Although many researchers have since proposed different definitions of PSS,
it has generally been considered as “product(s) and service(s) combined in a system to enable new
innovation models aiming to fulfill customer needs” [2,3,13,14].
2.2. Characteristics of PSS
The main characteristics of PSS, in comparison with pure products or services, are threefold. First,
firms can improve the level of interaction with their customers through PSS. In terms of customer
relationships, the products, and services offered through PSS play a complementary role in satisfying
the customers’ requirements. For instance, if a company that sells washing machines also provides
laundry service to its customers, the interaction with customers will be increased because of the
characteristics of this add-on service. Second, there are a variety of types of payment and ownership of
PSS [15]. This is because PSS is an integrated model of ownable and tangible products and non-owned
and intangible services. Accordingly, most PSS providers have ownership of their PSS and sell the
usage rights or results. Tukker [15] suggested three main categories of PSS, including product-oriented
services, use-oriented services, and result-oriented services. In case of use-oriented services and
result-oriented services, the payment reference is not for the product, but a payment per unit time or
unit use, and so on. The product stays in ownership with the provider in the above cases, whereas
products are mainly sold and some extra services are added in product-oriented services. Here, there
is no pre-determined product involved for result-oriented services.
Lastly, stakeholders creating PSS value are very diverse [16,17], including PSS providers and
customers. A representative example where integrated products and services are provided through
collaboration among several firms is Apple’s AppStore.
2.3. Types of PSS
The most widely accepted of the proposed PSS types is the work by Tukker [15]. The three main
categories are as follows: product-oriented PSS, use-oriented PSS, and result-oriented PSS. First, the
product-oriented PSS is the most similar to the concept of the traditional product, since the value
is achieved by selling the product. However, this is accompanied by additional services such as
after-sales services to guarantee the functionality of the product. Second, use-oriented PSS basically
sells the “use” of a product, not the product itself. What is delivered to the customer is a function that
the customer wants, for example, leasing or sharing services. Finally, result-oriented PSS sells a result
or capability instead of a product. The customer pays only for the provision of agreed results. Selling
laundered clothes instead of a washing machine is a good example of result-oriented PSS [3,15].
2.4. Research on PSS Development Process
Most studies of the PSS development process have been based on the development process
of products or services and consist of three main phases: analysis, idea generation, and selection,
and implementation [17]. The first phase, analysis, includes environmental analysis, SWOT analysis,
and so on, which has been treated as a small part of PSS development research. Nevertheless, some
methodologies have been developed and employed in the analysis phase. The “Innovation Scan”
was developed for analyzing and forecasting the relationship between customer needs and product
functions [18], while the product-service integrated roadmap was proposed for the strategic planning
of product-service integrated offerings [19]. The next phase, idea generation and selection, has been
the most actively studied. Lee and Kim [20] classified PSS by function and developed PSS ideas using
a combination of products and services. Low et al. [4], Chen and Huang [21], and Chen and Li [22]
utilized TRIZ for idea generation. The TRIZ method stands for “Teoriya Resheniya Izobretatelskikh
455
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
Zadatch” in Russian which means theory of inventive problem solving [23,24]. This method solves
technical problems and offers innovative product structures by employing a knowledge base built
from the analyses of approximately 2.5 million patents, primarily on mechanical design [25]. TRIZ
consists of three basic tools: (1) 40 principles to resolve conflicts effectively; (2) a knowledge database
system that consists of physical, chemical, and geometrical effects and rules for problem solving; and
(3) modeling a technological problem.
Uhlmann and Stelzer [26] suggested seven dimensions to determine PSS ideas through a case
study. The seven dimensions are composed of customer skills, customer will to build up skills, property
rights, human resources, outsourcing of product, existing network of suppliers, and process monitoring
to determine PSS ideas through a case study.
Meiner and Kroll [27] proposed an approach to creating a new PSS model based on service
processes. In addition, many tools, such as extended service blueprint [10], system map, interaction
storyboard, stakeholder motivation matrix [28], modified IDEF0 [29], and many others to design PSSes
using generated and selected new ideas have been developed. Finally, in the implementation phase,
Schuh and Gudergan [30] suggested a framework using QFD (Quality Function Deployment) and
Yang et al. [11] provided a methodology for the realization of PSSes through the utilization of product
life-cycle data. The QFD has been widely used since Akao suggested it in 1990. The tool that has been
used most frequently in QFD is a matrix called the House Of Quality (HOQ), which is utilized for the
aim of converting market information into product strategies for business [31].
As we have explained, most previous research on PSS development has focused on a specific
phase, not the whole development process. In particular, these studies have been mainly conducted
from the product-centric point of view. In other words, previous studies of PSS development dealt
with products and relevant supporting services, but the converse was not the case. While the term,
“service-oriented product” was utilized in some studies [32,33], it represented use-oriented PSS
rather than service-supporting products. Therefore, research on the entire development process
for service-oriented PSS is still the domain of a few pioneers.
3. Service-Oriented PSS Development
3.1. Concept
This research proposes the service-oriented PSS development process for developing a new
innovation model. The term, “service-oriented PSS” stands for a PSS in which a product is integrated
into a service as a supporting tool to make the existing service more competitive. The distinctive
characteristics of the service-oriented PSS are twofold. First, customer needs for the existing service
are the starting point of service-oriented PSS development, whereas product-centric PSS development
begins with the needs for the product itself or the context of product usage. After customer needs
for the service are investigated, the product functions to fulfill these needs are derived from the
investigation result. Subsequently, new services are developed by combining the existing service with
the new product. Where a single service cannot meet customer needs without a product, it can be
complemented by the integration of the service and product. That is to say, functions required for
the product are derived from customer needs for the service, and the product makes the service more
competitive. The integration of the service and product constitutes the service-oriented PSS, which can
provide greater competitiveness and value than a stand-alone service.
Second, in service-oriented PSS development, the role of the product manufacturer should receive
greater emphasis than that of the service provider in product-centric PSS development. Most previous
studies on PSS development considered services as the means to offer customers ancillary value in
order to raise lock-in effects and sales from the manufacturers’ viewpoint, and manufacturers introduce
and operate their own services in many cases [7]. On the other hand, it is hard for service providers to
develop and produce products. In a relative sense, products are dependent on technologies, equipment,
and facilities, whereas services are dependent on humans. Thus, service providers should establish
456
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
strong partnerships with manufacturers to develop service-oriented PSSes and closely collaborate with
partners on product and service developments. In these regards, service-oriented PSS development
differs from product-centric PSS development.
3.2. Framework
The service-oriented PSS development process proposed in this research is derived from
the product development process of Cooper et al. [34,35], the service development process of
Brügemann [36], and several cases of PSS development projects summarized by Tukker and
Tischner [17]. The product development process of Cooper et al. [34,35] is represented by the
stage-gate process which comprises a five-stage (scoping, build business case, development, testing
and validation, and launch), five gate (idea screen, second screen, go to development, go to testing, and
go to launch) process incorporating a discovery stage and a post-launch review, whereas the service
development process of Brügemann [36] is composed of eight stages: “situation analysis”, “objectives”,
“strategy”, “idea finding”, “generation of requirements”, “development”, “implementation”, and
“delivery of service”. Tukker and Tischner [17] investigated PSS development methods used in PSS
development projects and grouped them into three phases, “analysis”, “idea generation and selection”,
and “implementation”. Based on these references, we made the service-oriented PSS development
process by grouping similar stages and excluding stages related to marketing, distribution, and use
in order to focus on development. The result consists of four stages, “strategic planning”, “idea
generation and selection”, “service design”, and “product development”. Between every stage,
an intermediate evaluation and back-loop scheme using the results of intermediate evaluation is
applied like Cooper et al.’s five gates. Contrary to the previous sequential processes, the proposed
process is a hybrid of sequential and parallel processes, because PSS development includes product
development as well as service development. The planning and idea generation for PSS development
are carried out sequentially and service design proceeds in parallel with product development.
As shown in Figure 1, the service-oriented PSS development process has two layers, a service
provider layer and product partner (manufacturer) layer, which show the participants for each stage.
Service-oriented PSS development is initiated by the service provider, hence the first stage, “strategic
planning” is carried out by the service provider alone. The next stage, “idea generation and selection”
is performed by the service provider and the product partner selected in the previous stage. Together
they generate detailed ideas for planned PSS development. Subsequently, the third and fourth stages,
“service design” and “product development”, are conducted concurrently by the service provider
and the product partner, respectively. At this time, the key aspect to successful PSS development is
to achieve consensus on the service and product through effective communication and interaction
between the two actors. To this end, the results of service design should be delivered to the product
partner in order to verify the technical feasibility of the required service functions, and the pilot
product should also be delivered to the service provider in order to judge the suitability of the design
and functions. These collaborations are expressed as arrows between “service design” and “product
development” in Figure 1. Here, a service-oriented PSS can be developed from the open innovation
concept of Chesbrough [37]. From a service-centered point of view, product partners can be considered
as external; i.e., the use of purposive inflows and outflows of knowledge is to accelerate internal
innovation and expand the markets for external use of innovation. Actors and key features for each
stage of the service-oriented PSS development process are summarized in Table 1.
457
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
Figure 1. Service-oriented PSS development process.
Table 1. Actors and key features for each stage of the service-oriented PSS development process.
Stage Actor Key Feature
Strategic Planning Service Provider
The service-oriented PSS development is
initiated by the service provider, and a
product partner is selected.
Idea Generation and Selection Service Provider &
Product Partner
During this stage, there is a preliminary
check of the feasibility of the ideas and
consensus on the detailed PSS concept is
achieved through collaboration between
the two actors.
PSS Development
Service Design Service Provider Detailed service features and product
functions are verified and redesigned based
on feedback. Finally, the final
service-oriented PSS is developed.
Product Development Product Partner
Launching Service Provider &
Product Partner
The service-oriented PSS is launched in the
market.
3.3. Detailed Process
3.3.1. Strategic Planning
A service-oriented PSS development project is initiated by the service provider and the first stage
is strategic planning. First, the service provider determines what to develop. In the case that services,
alone, are provided, the service provider builds a general concept of PSS development that combines
the existing services and product in order to increase competitiveness and customer satisfaction as
well as add new value for customers. Thereafter, the service provider conducts situation analyses,
including market analysis, competence analysis, competitor analysis, and so on. Subsequently, the
concrete objectives of the PSS development project and the team that will lead it are formulated.
Lastly, the product partner that will cover the product development is selected. The selection of a
product partner to develop the service-oriented PSS can be accomplished through a variety of methods.
Among them, an emergent theory of partner selection through collaboration, similar to that produced
by Emden et al. [38], is utilized. The model is composed of three broad phases: (1) technological
alignment; (2) strategic alignment; and (3) relational alignment. Technological capability, resource
complementarity, and overlapping knowledge bases are considered in the first phase. Then, motivation
and goal correspondence are checked in the second phase. Finally, compatible cultures, propensity to
change, and long-term orientation are screened in the third phase.
458
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
3.3.2. Idea Generation and Selection
The second stage is idea generation and selection, which are conducted by the service provider and
the product partner selected in the previous stage. In this stage, it is essential to investigate customer
needs for the existing service and derive product functions from these needs. To this end, expected
user groups are firstly selected, and each group’s needs for the existing service are investigated
thoroughly. At this point, not only customer needs but also their desired requirements i.e., what they
ultimately want from the service, should be identified. Interviews and surveys are the most useful
and representative methods for this purpose. Particularly, in-depth interviews with customers and
related experts are an effective means to figure out the ideal service scenarios and product functions
required when the service is combined with the product. In addition, reviews in relevant professional
publications and reports, and benchmarking of existing relevant services and products can provide the
implications of success and failure factors that help derive product functions.
The next step is to derive product functions based on prior investigations of customer needs.
At this point, customer needs are converted into product functions in a similar manner to QFD, which
transforms customer needs into engineering/process requirements. Subsequently, additional functions
can be added from the benchmarking results. Eventually, the customer needs generated from the
service are analyzed and converted into product functions.
The following step is to match up functions with desired requirements using QFD. The desired
requirements can be varied according to the purpose and situation of each user group. Thus, the
functions that will be provided should differ in accordance with user groups. To deal with this problem,
the actors in this stage should analyze the user context and derive desired requirements according to
each user group’s context based on the results of the investigation conducted previously. Subsequently,
actors match every function with certain desired requirements and user groups. Consequently, the
results can show a user group and its desired requirements provided by a specific function, functions
needed by a specific user group, and functions that fulfill certain desired requirements. An exemplified
outcome of this task is illustrated in Figure 2.
Lastly, functions are prioritized by the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) method and core
functions are selected as the final outcome of this stage. The AHP is a decision-aiding method
developed by Saaty [39–41]. It is one of the most widely used multi-criteria decision-making tools and
is an Eigenvalue approach to pair-wise comparisons. It also provides a methodology to calibrate the
numeric scale for the measurement of both quantitative and qualitative performances [42]. The number
of core functions can vary according to constraints such as project schedule and financial budget, and
the remaining functions can be developed and added to the next version of the PSS. Through the
previous steps such as investigating customer needs and desired requirements, deriving functions,
and linking functions with desired requirements, participants in this stage can be regarded as experts
who have sufficient knowledge about the desired requirements and the necessary functions. Thus,
they can evaluate the relative importance between two functions based on their experiences when
using the AHP method.
Figure 2. An example of a matrix for linking functions to desired requirements for each user context.
459
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
3.3.3. Service Design
The service design stage and the product development stage proceed in parallel under the
respective guidance of the service provider and product partner after the second stage, idea generation
and selection. In the service design stage, the service provider designs services in detail, which can be
realized with the product functions derived in the previous stage.
Service dominant logic is comprised of five steps as follows: (1) as-is analysis; (2) setting service
design direction; (3) creating service use-cases; (4) making service scenarios; and (5) checking feasibility.
First, the service provider conducts the “as-is analysis”, which analyzes the current situation of services
offered without a product. The deficiencies in current services that are contrary to the ideal services
and desired requirements are derived from “as-is analysis”. Thereafter, the service provider establishes
the direction of the service design for overcoming the gap between the current services and the ideal
ones via integration with product functions. Subsequently, the service provider develops use-cases
based on the design direction, which includes elements such as actors (users, service providers, and so
on), product, and infrastructure (systems, networks, and so on.) as well as the relationships between
elements such as information input/output and physical materials. After all the use cases have been
developed, service scenarios for each user group can be created by aggregating them. During these
tasks, modeling methods such as IDEF0 which is a compound acronym Icam DEFinition for Function
Modeling, where “ICAM” is an acronym for Integrated Computer Aided Manufacturing and service
blueprint [29] can be exploited. After the use cases and service scenarios have been developed, they are
delivered to the product partner to verify the technical feasibility. Then, the service provider receives
feedback on the technical feasibility of the service, and redesigns services based on this. Furthermore,
the service provider should give feedback on the pilot product to the product partner.
3.3.4. Product Development
In this stage, the product partner develops the product. The product partner develops the basic
design, architecture, and product specifications, and realizes the functions derived from the idea
generation and selection. Once the pilot product is created, the product partner should deliver it to
the service provider and modify its design, functions, and so on, according to the feedback from the
service provider. In addition, once the product partner receives the use cases and service scenarios
from the service provider, the product partner checks the feasibility to determine whether it is possible
to realize the product functions required by the service or not. If there is a function that is impossible to
realize, the product partner sends feedback so that the relevant service can be redesigned. Otherwise,
the product partner modifies the functions, architecture, or specifications of the product according to
the use cases and service scenarios. Effective and efficient interaction between the service provider
and product partner is critical to develop a successful PSS. Thus, various iterations of feasibility
checks, verifications, feedback and redesigns are inevitable while jointly developing the service and
product. Once the final consensus on the service and product is achieved through these processes,
the product partner manufactures the products. Finally, service-oriented PSS development is finished
and launched. There are many factors to take into account when launching a service-oriented PSS.
The launching stage needs to address some basic issues such as launch goal and strategy, major player
and stakeholders, target customers, current market environment, and so on [43]. It is critical to carefully
design a launch plan and prepare internally before a public launch. This internal preparation will
address issues such as testing and validation, pricing, documentation, warranty, demos, sales tools,
training for sale/channels/service/support, and so on.
4. Illustration: T Smart Learning
4.1. Introduction to the Case Companies and the PSS Development Project
The illustration in this paper is derived from a PSS development project undertaken by S Telecom
in collaboration with C Learning. S Telecom is a mobile service provider in Korea, with 50.6% market
460
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
share as of 2010. Since its launch on 29 March 1984 S Telecom has evolved from a first-generation analog
cellular system, to a second-generation CDMA provider, and then to the world’s first third-generation
synchronized IMT-2000 cellular system. S Telecom also became the world’s first company to
commercialize HSDPA in May 2006. S Telecom provides not only mobile telecommunication services
but also convergence services including media, social networking, content delivery, location-based
service, platform, commerce, and a host of other options. Recently, S Telecom has been actively seeking
new business opportunities to cope with B2C market saturation by developing B2B innovation models
in various industry sectors, including the education industry.
C Learning is a language institute located in Korea and Canada. C Learning was founded in
1998 and offers ESL (English as a Second Language) learning services by combining self-developed
programs and native English-speaking instructors. C Learning provides more than 60,000 students
with unique programs based on critical thinking and cognitive language development. This is made
possible by more than 1300 instructors, 390 corporate employees, and its ESL R-and-D center. Recently,
the company has reached saturation in terms of the number of students it can teach due to physical
space constraints. Thus, an innovative method for continuous growth is required. Additionally, the
Korean Education Ministry unveiled a plan to introduce a new English aptitude test—NEAT (National
English Ability Test)—that focuses on tests of speaking and writing ability, and will replace the English
section of the standardized college entrance examination. Therefore, new coursework and classes to
prepare for the NEAT will have to be created.
Under this background, S Telecom and C Learning signed a memorandum of understanding
on developing an English learning system that uses wireless communications networks to allow
students to study anywhere and anytime, keep parents up to date with students’ progress, and to
increase communication between the teacher and students within the classroom. The characteristics
of this system as a PSS are as follows. It consists of actors (students, parents, and instructors),
contents, learning-support devices, and network infrastructures. From its inception, the project
considered English learning services and learning-support devices (products) simultaneously in order
to create a successful PSS that can raise the effectiveness and efficiency of learning. Accordingly, many
stakeholders’ needs were investigated and incorporated during the development process. Furthermore,
this system will only be meaningful if customer needs are fulfilled by the services or functions offered
via the product. Thus, product possession itself has no meaning. In particular, product functions were
developed in order to fulfill customer needs and desired requirements that were derived and analyzed
from existing English learning services. These characteristics made this English learning system a
service-oriented PSS.
4.2. Strategic Planning
To begin, S Telecom and C Learning analyzed the global trend and potential of the English
education market, the state of affairs of the major IT players (Apple, Intel, and so on) in the education
sector, and local cases of device-based learning services by mobile service providers. These analyses
produced the following results: (1) English education is experiencing high growth in the global market
and Asia is the most promising region; (2) the focus of English education is moving toward improving
fundamental listening, speaking, reading, and writing abilities, instead of grammar and reading
comprehension; and (3) key success factors for a device-based learning system involve not only fine
contents but also specialized functions increase the effectiveness of education. Consequently, S Telecom
and C Learning set up an objective to develop a PSS that combines an English learning service and
a mobile device. The first target service was the NEAT coursework, which had already been made
by the R-and-D center of C Learning. The target product was a tablet PC-like device, which supports
wireless data communication and provides specialized functions for effectively improving listening,
speaking, reading, and writing English abilities. In addition, they made a plan to gradually expand
the target market by adding other coursework and subjects and entering global education markets
such as China and Southeast Asian countries.
461
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
Next, S Telecom and C Learning set up an exclusive TFT (Task Force Team) for developing the
product. After establishing the team setting, the TFT searched for various device manufacturers and
software developers in order to select product partners, and contacted them based on considerations
of technological competency and quality, as well as cost. Finally, the hardware and software-product
partners were selected and members from these product partners joined the TFT.
4.3. Idea Generation and Selection
For idea generation and selection, the TFT thoroughly investigated customer needs and desired
requirements in English education. The TFT conducted in-depth interviews with more than 20 students
and parents, and 20 experts in English education such as English teachers, directors of language
institutes, and coursework developers so that users’ and teachers’ needs for existing English learning
services and ideal methods of learning English were investigated. Additionally, the TFT reviewed eight
books about the theory of English learning and 11 autobiographies by people who were successful
in learning English. They also benchmarked 52 on/offline learning services and 36 learning-support
devices. This broad and deep investigation enabled the TFT to achieve a full understanding of the
existing English education services. It is very important to devote sufficient time and effort to this kind
of task, since it serves as the foundation of the following tasks.
After extensive investigations, the TFT derived device functions based on the investigation results.
The needs were converted into functions via QFD methodology, and other functions were added
based on the benchmarking results. In this process, there was a preliminary check of the feasibilities
of the functions, especially by TFT members who joined from product partners. For example, the
“eyeball tracking” function was excluded due to technical problems and cost. Finally, 149 functions
were derived. Examples of customer needs and relevant functions are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2. Examples of customer needs and relevant functions.
User Group Need Function
Student
“Although I cannot understand what is said in
class, I hesitate to ask a question.”
“I want learning to be more interesting.”
“I want more exposure to English.”
Evaluating the current level, Daily test,
Learning history, Learning game, Role-play,
Avatar, Online community, Push contents,
and etc.
Teacher
“I want to arouse students’ interest with teaching
materials made of multimedia contents such as
movies, sitcoms, news, and pop songs.”
“In the class, it takes too much time to correct
each student’s speaking and writing.”
“I want to check homework and score exams
more efficiently.”
Coursework generator, Multimedia
contents library, Speaking evaluation,
Writing evaluation, Auto-grading, Class
planner, Student profile management,
and etc.
Parent
“I wonder my child follows the coursework well.”
“I want to know how much my child’s
achievement level is improving.”
Informing of diagnosis results, Informing of
progress, Informing of attitude in class,
and etc.
The following step involves matching functions with desired requirements as well as the user
context for each user group using QFD. This task was conducted through a one-day workshop attended
by all members of the TFT, whereas previous tasks such as interviews, benchmarking, and function
derivation were assigned to groups composed of two or three members. The TFT divided users into
three groups: student, teacher and parent. For each group, the TFT analyzed user context and derived
desired requirements in each context based on the investigation results (see Figures 3 and 4). Finally,
34 function sets were derived by grouping similar functions among 149 functions.
462
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
Figure 3. The partial outcome of linking functions to desired requirements for students’ context.
Figure 4. The partial outcome of linking functions to desired requirements for students’ context.
Lastly, the TFT prioritized the function sets by the AHP method, and selected the core function
sets. Since too many functions were derived, it was not reasonable to develop them all together in view
of time-to-market, development cost, and quality. Thus, the TFT needed to select functions that would
be developed for the first version of T Smart Learning, and the AHP method was employed for this aim.
In addition, all members took an entire day to prioritize function sets as a group. The criteria for AHP
were determined through discussion as follows: (1) effectiveness of learning; (2) personalized learning;
and (3) competitiveness. After obtaining the weights for all criteria by pairwise comparisons, the TFT
conducted pairwise comparisons between function sets for each criterion. Eventually, all function sets
were prioritized and all consistency ratios were below 0.1, which means that all comparisons were
consistent (see Table 3). Based on the priorities, five function sets for students were selected as core
function sets. Additionally, the function sets for teachers and parents were selected as core function sets
in order to cover all user groups, even though these priorities were ranked below the other function sets.
In the final outcome (see Appendix 5), the core function sets included: (1) listening-specialized function
set; (2) speaking-specialized function set; (3) reading-specialized function set; (4) writing-specialized
function set; (5) personal care function set; (6) teacher-support function set; and (7) parent-support
function set. Other function sets will be developed and added in the next version of T Smart Learning.
463
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
In this step, the AHP method was an effective means to reach a consensus on which functions
would be developed first. During pairwise comparisons, the members of TFT discussed the relative
importance between functions and, consequently, the consensus was built spontaneously. Thus, the
AHP method served as a tool for not only prioritizing functions but also for building a consensus
among TFT members.
Table 3. Priority of criteria and consistency ratio.
Criteria Priority Consistency Ratio for Function Sets Evaluation
Effectiveness of learning 0.5438 0.05066
Personalized learning 0.1103 0.02724
Competitiveness 0.3460 0.03084
4.4. Service Design
The TFT (excluding members from product partners) designed services in detail, which can be
realized by utilizing the core functions derived in the previous stage. First, the TFT analyzed the
deficiencies of the current English education services offered without a product, and derived the
service design direction for each function set to compensate for the gap between the current situation
and desired requirements investigated previously. Thereafter, the TFT created the service use-cases
based on the design directions and developed service scenarios by aggregating use-cases.
The case of the speaking-specialized function set is as follows. The requirements for learning
how to speak English are mimicking, imitation, reproduction, presentation, debate, self-check, and
evaluation. In detail, students should listen to the native speaker’s pronunciation and imitate it at the
beginning. The next step is to practice various expressions that have similar meanings. Subsequently,
it is necessary to improve the ability to organize the contents of what will be said. Finally, students
will be able to make a presentation and participate in a debate with their own thoughts and opinions.
In all these processes, self-check and evaluation can make learning more effective. However, there is
little or no chance to speak English in reality. Moreover, students cannot find self-learning methods
or receive instant feedback on their speaking abilities. Thus, the TFT established the design direction
as follows: (1) providing various expressions recorded in a native speaker’s pronunciation in order
to allow self-practice; (2) giving instant feedback on speaking ability; and (3) offering a virtual place
to communicate with colleagues via telepresence. According to these design directions, the TFT
designed service use cases such as “speaking English by watching one’s face via a camera in the
device”, “comparing one’s pronunciation with a native speaker’s by a record and play function”,
“providing a role-play service through which one can communicate with virtual characters through
the device”, and “providing a group discussion service via telepresence and giving instant feedback
based on STT (Speech-to-Text) technology”. The TFT delivered these outcomes to the product partners
and received feedback from them. Subsequently, the use-cases were redesigned based on the feedback.
For example, the software product partner recommended that the TFT change “giving instant feedback
based on STT technology” because of the low accuracy of current STT technology. Thus, the TFT
changed the concept of the feedback service from automated instant feedback to semi-automated
not-instant feedback, in which manual correction by a teacher is included. The use-case of the feedback
service is shown in Figure 5.
464
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
Figure 5. The use-case of the feedback service.
Finally, the TFT developed the service scenario for each user group by aggregating the service
use-cases, and the partial outcome of the service scenario for the students is illustrated in Figure 6.
The service scenarios were also confirmed by the product partners.
Figure 6. The partial outcome of the service scenario for the student.
4.5. Product Development
The respective hardware and software-product partners developed the hardware and software
products that could realize the core functions derived in the idea generation and selection stage.
During the development process, the product partners received service use-cases and scenarios from
the TFT and incorporated them into the product development. Furthermore, the product partners
communicated with the TFT continuously to receive feedback on the intermediate outcomes, and
modified the products accordingly. The hardware product partner intended to develop a new device
that specialized in learning, and the software product partner intended to develop a new software
platform and related applications for the device based on Android open-source software.
However, it was hard to complete the hardware product development before the scheduled date.
When considering the quality, cost, and release timing, the TFT and product partners decided to apply
an existing tablet PC for the first version. Accordingly, the TFT and the hardware product partner
465
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
consented to develop a learning-specialized device based on a long-term plan, whereas the software
product partner developed the application launcher that would make an Android OS-based tablet PC
operate as a new learning device. In this case, the application launcher can be regarded as another OS
operating on top of the Android OS. While developing the software product, the software product
partner improved the user interface and functions according to feedback from the TFT. Although the
shape and specifications of the device are identical with the existing general-purpose tablet PC, the
device with the launcher can provide an entirely new English-learning experience. In addition to the
launcher, the software product partner developed a system comprised of the architecture, platform,
and servers, which is indispensable for operating a service based on a mobile network and device
(see Figure 7). Finally, S Telecom and C Learning launched a service-oriented PSS, T Smart Learning,
on 18 July 2011, after a one month pilot test. The actual appearance of T Smart Learning is shown
in Figure 8. The left figure is the main screen of T Smart Learning and the right one is the screen
studying English.
Figure 7. System architecture of T Smart Learning.
466
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
Figure 8. Actual appearance of T Smart Learning.
4.6. Discussions and Implications
The proposed framework was validated by applying it to a practical case in the illustration
part. Although many cases can be utilized for complete validation, this paper performed an in-depth
analysis in the T Smart Learning case to investigate the details of the framework. Consequently, the
systematic approach to develop a service-oriented PSS enabled us to successfully generate creative
ideas, design a service, and develop a PSS by reflecting the interaction between service providers and
product partners. The most important part in the validation is how much users are satisfied with the
practicality of the suggested approach. The TFT members in the aforementioned case highlighted the
usefulness of four stages and techniques in each stage such as QFD and scenario analysis. In addition,
active feedbacks among stakeholders could facilitate the process of developing the PSS.
However, several critical points should be considered to elevate the quality of application of the
proposed approach. In the idea generation and selection stage of our case study, the TFT members of
service providers had difficulty defining functions and judging their development potential. They also
had difficulty separating them into hardware and software products because of the lack of knowledge
and product development experience. At this time, the TFT members of the product partners played
a key role in checking the feasibility of the functions and classifying them. On the contrary, the
members of product partners who had a rudimentary understanding of the service gained a deeper
understanding through the steps of deriving functions and conducting the AHP method, and this
positively influenced the development of the requisite product in service-oriented PSS. Thus, it is
definitely necessary to involve the product partners in the idea generation and selection stage.
The service providers and product partners should communicate and interact during the service
design and product development stages. Through efficient and effective communication feedback
is exchanged and incorporated into service design and product development. If miscommunication
occurs at this point, the project team will not achieve satisfactory results. In our case, all TFT members
got together and shared the progress of service design and product development once every two
weeks. In spite of that, the project schedule was actually delayed due to miscommunication. Thus, it is
necessary to execute more research on a systematic method for effective communication between the
service design and product development teams. In this regard, Kleinsmann et al. [44] found factors that
influence the creation of a shared understanding in collaborative new product development, and they
also identified four collaboration types and their mechanisms. A similar study of PSS development
would provide valuable findings and implications.
It is not easy to develop a new hardware product for service-oriented PSS. In our case,
a general-purpose tablet PC was employed, contrary to the initial objective, although the hardware
product partner still aimed to develop a new device that specialized in English education. Since
the development of a new hardware product is highly risky in terms of cost and time, the service
provider should consider customizing a general-purpose hardware product from its inception. Thus,
467
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
the decision-making step on whether to develop or customize should be included in future research
on the service-oriented PSS development process.
5. Conclusions
This paper proposes a service-oriented PSS development process in which the PSS development
project is initiated and led by a service provider from a service-centric point of view. The proposed
process, which is based on the product development process, service development process, and
cases of PSS development projects, consists of four stages: (1) strategic planning; (2) idea generation
and selection; (3) service design; and (4) product development. For each stage, actors and detailed
procedures, including key features and useful methods, are suggested. Additionally, the real PSS
development case of an English education service is introduced in detail as a demonstration of the
application of the proposed process.
The contribution of this paper is that it expands the current scope of PSS research by suggesting
the concept and development process of service-oriented PSS from the service provider’s viewpoint,
contrary to the manufacturer’s viewpoint of existing studies. This can establish a foundation for
research on service-oriented PSS development. Moreover, the proposed process and illustration are
expected to serve as a useful guideline when service providers develop a service-oriented PSS.
However, this paper has some limitations. Firstly, the majority of the proposed process covers
qualitative aspects. If more quantitative methods are added to the process, the proposed process
can be made more systematic. Thus, the systematic and quantitative approach to partner selection,
idea generation, service design, and collaboration with product partners are future research topics.
Secondly, the case presented in this paper covers only specific industry sectors. Numerous case
studies of broad industry sectors can provide us with worthwhile implications for service-oriented
PSS development. In particular, cases of proven market success could confirm the validity of the
proposed process. Therefore, in-depth case studies of various industries including successful cases
could be another line of future research. Thirdly, since this research focuses on the PSS development
process, subsequent processes such as a launching and operating process were not dealt with in this
paper. Unique characteristics of PSS can be reflected to implement the details of the launching and
operating processes. Thus, future research can present a complete framework of service-oriented PSS
development from planning to operation by including the launching and operating process.
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant funded by
the Korean Government (NRF-2014R1A1A2054892).
Author Contributions: Seungkyum Kim designed the study, outlined the methodology, analyzed the data,
interpreted the results and wrote the manuscript. Changho Son analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript.
Byungun Yoon designed the study and wrote the manuscript. Yongtae Park implemented the research, designed
the study, outlined the methodology, and helped complete the draft of this research. All authors have read and
approved the final manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
468
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
Appendix
Table A1. 34 Function sets and AHP results.
User Group Function Sets
AHP Results
Effectiveness Note
of Learning
Personalized
Learning Competitiveness Overall
Priority
student writing-specialized 0.05249 0.05220 0.08347 0.06317 core function
student speaking-specialized 0.05517 0.05220 0.05839 0.05596 core function
student listening-specialized 0.05438 0.05220 0.05839 0.05553 core function
student reading-specialized 0.05431 0.05220 0.05839 0.05549 core function
student personal care 0.05309 0.05220 0.05839 0.05482 core function
teacher interaction in class 0.03939 0.05986 0.06446 0.05032 core function
(teacher-support)
teacher auto-correction 0.05693 0.04637 0.03691 0.04884 core function
(teacher-support)
student dictionary 0.05161 0.04637 0.03691 0.04595
teacher auto-grading 0.04297 0.04402 0.03739 0.04116 core function
(teacher-support)
student note 0.04175 0.02700 0.03615 0.03819
student planner 0.04283 0.01653 0.02806 0.03482
student diagnosis 0.02942 0.03376 0.03715 0.03258
student push contents 0.03615 0.01263 0.01679 0.02686
student contents library 0.02209 0.02926 0.03220 0.02638
student game 0.02837 0.03330 0.02007 0.02604
teacher checking homework 0.02182 0.03009 0.03117 0.02597 core function
(teacher-support)
teacher making tests 0.02755 0.01008 0.01998 0.02300 core function
(teacher-support)
teacher making teaching
material 0.01824 0.03138 0.02745 0.02288 core function
(teacher-support)
student communication 0.02073 0.01957 0.02633 0.02254
student search 0.03144 0.01354 0.01139 0.02253
parent informing of
diagnosis results 0.02337 0.01279 0.01139 0.01806 core function
(parent-support)
parent informing of progress 0.01537 0.02573 0.01967 0.01800 core function
(parent-support)
student counseling 0.01593 0.01276 0.02117 0.01739
teacher class/student
management 0.01538 0.01974 0.01211 0.01473 core function
(teacher-support)
teacher communication with
parents 0.01499 0.01974 0.01211 0.01452
parent informing of attitude
in class 0.01394 0.02704 0.01072 0.01427 core function
(parent-support)
parent intimacy 0.01190 0.02276 0.01160 0.01300 core function
(parent-support)
parent education-related
information 0.01226 0.01660 0.01215 0.01270 core function
(parent-support)
student synchronization 0.01073 0.01974 0.01211 0.01220
teacher other teacher-support 0.00889 0.02055 0.01160 0.01112
student help 0.01079 0.01092 0.01008 0.01056
teacher student control 0.00920 0.00852 0.01095 0.00973
student timer 0.00789 0.01206 0.01160 0.00964
parent nurture-related
information 0.00696 0.01014 0.01139 0.00885 core function
(parent-support)
469
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
References
1. Martinez, V.; Bastl, M.; Kingston, J.; Evans, S. Challenges in transforming manufacturing organizations into
product-service providers. J. Manuf. Technol. Manag. 2010, 21, 449–469.
2. Goedkoop, M.J.; van Halen, C.J.G.; te Riele, H.R.M.; Rommens, P.J.M. Product Service Systems, Ecological and
Economic Basis; Technical Report; Pre Consultants: Amersfoort, The Netherlands, 1999.
3. Baines, T.S.; Lightfoot, H.W.; Evans, S.; Neely, A.; Greenough, R.; Peppard, J.; Roy, R.; Shehab, E.; Braganza, A.;
Tiwari, A.; et al. State-of-the-art in product-service systems. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part B 2007, 221, 1543–1552.
[CrossRef]
4. Low, M.K.; Lamvik, T.; Walsh, K.; Myklebust, O. Manufacturing a green service: Engaging the TRIZ model
of innovation. IEEE Trans. Electron. Packag. Manuf. 2001, 24, 10–17.
5. Alonso-Rasgado, T.; Thompson, G. A rapid design process for Total Care Product creation. J. Eng. Des. 2006,
17, 509–531. [CrossRef]
6. Aurich, J.C.; Fuchs, C.; Wagenknecht, C. Life cycle oriented design of technical Product-Service Systems.
J. Clean. Prod. 2006, 14, 1480–1494. [CrossRef]
7. Tan, A.R.; McAloone, T.C.; Gall, C. Product/service-system development—An explorative case study in a
manufacturing company. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Engineering Design 2007, Paris,
France, 28–31 August 2007.
8. Uchihira, N.; Kyoya, Y.; Kim, S.; Maeda, K.; Ozawa, M.; Ishii, K. Analysis and Design Methodology for
Recognizing Opportunities and Difficulties for Product-based Services. In Proceedings of the PICMET 2007,
Portland, OR, USA, 5–9 August 2007.
9. Sakao, T.; Sandström, G.Ö.; Matzen, D. Framing research for service orientation of manufacturers through
PSS approaches. J. Manuf. Technol. Manag. 2009, 20, 754–778.
10. Shimomura, Y.; Hara, T.; Arai, T. A unified representation scheme for effective PSS development.
CIRP Ann.-Manuf. Technol. 2009, 58, 379–382. [CrossRef]
11. Yang, X.; Moore, P.; Pu, J.; Wong, C. A practical methodology for realizing product service systems for
consumer products. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2009, 56, 224–235. [CrossRef]
12. Wong, M. Implementation of innovative product service-systems in the consumer goods industry.
Ph.D. Thesis, University of Cambridge, Department of Engineering, Cambridge, UK, 2004.
13. Mont, O. Clarifying the concept of product-service system. J. Clean. Prod. 2002, 10, 237–245. [CrossRef]
14. Manzini, E.; Vezzoli, C. A strategic design approach to develop sustainable product service systems:
Examples taken from the “environmentally friendly innovation” Italian prize. J. Clean. Prod. 2003, 11,
851–857. [CrossRef]
15. Tukker, A. Eight types of product service system: Eight ways to sustainability experiences from SusProNet.
Bus. Strateg. Environ. 2004, 13, 246–260. [CrossRef]
16. Krucken, L.; Meroni, A. Building stakeholder networks to develop and deliver product-service-systems:
Practical experiences on elaborating pro-active materials for communication. J. Clean. Prod. 2006, 14,
1502–1508. [CrossRef]
17. Tukker, A.; Tischner, U. New Business for Old Europe: Product-Service Development, Competitiveness and
Sustainability; Greenleaf Publishing: Sheffield, UK, 2006.
18. Tukker, A.; van Halen, C. Innovation Scan for Product Service Systems: Manual; TNO: Delft, The Netherlands;
PricewaterhouseCoopers: Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2003.
19. Suh, J.; Park, S. Service-oriented Technology Roadmap (SoTRM) using patent map for R&D strategy of
service industry. Expert Syst. Appl. 2009, 36, 6754–6772.
20. Lee, S.; Kim, Y. A product-service system design method integrating service function and service activity
and case studies. In Proceedings of the 2nd CIRP IPS2 Conference, Linköping, Sweden, 14–15 April 2010.
21. Chen, J.; Huang, C. A TRIZ based eco-innovation method for PSS. In Proceedings of the 16th CIRP
International Conference on Life Cycle Engineering, LCE 2009, Cairo, Egypt, 4–6 May 2009.
22. Chen, J.; Li, H. Innovative design method of product service system by using case study and TRIZ model.
In Proceedings of the 2nd CIRP IPS2 Conference, Linköping, Sweden, 14–15 April 2010.
23. Genrich, A.; Shulyak, L. And Suddenly the Inventor Appeared: TRIZ, the Theory of Inventive Problem Solving;
Technical Innovation Center, Inc.: Worcester, UK, 1996.
470
Sustainability 2015, 7, 14427–14449
24. Domb, E. QFD and TIPS/TRIZ. Available online: http://www.trizjournal.com/archives/1998/06/c/index.
htm (accessed on 23 October 2015).
25. Yamashina, H.; Ito, T.; Kawada, H. Innovative product development process by integrating QFD and TRIZ.
Int. J. Prod. Res. 2002, 40, 1031–1050. [CrossRef]
26. Uhlmann, E.; Stelzer, C. Identifiaction of the IPS2 business model in the early stage of creation. In Proceedings
of the 2nd CIRP IPS2 Conference, Linköping, Sweden, 14–15 April 2010.
27. Meier, H.; Kroll, M. From products to solutions-IPS2 as a means for creating customer value. In Proceedings
of the 16th CIRP International Conference on Life Cycle Engineering, LCE 2009, Cairo, Egypt, 4–6 May 2009.
28. Manzini, E.; Collina, L.; Evans, S. Solution Oriented Partnership: How to Design Industrialised Sustainable
Solutions; Cranfield University: Cranfield, UK, 2004.
29. Morelli, N. Developing new product service systems (PSS): Methodologies and operational tools. J. Clean.
Prod. 2006, 14, 145–1501. [CrossRef]
30. Schuh, G.; Gudergan, G. Service engineering as an approach to designing industrial product service
systems. In Proceedings of the 1st CIRP Industrial Product-Service Systems (IPS2) Conference, Cranfield,
UK, 1–2 April 2009.
31. Hauser, J.R.; Clausing, D. The house of quality. Harvard Business Review, May 1988; 63–73.
32. Umeda, Y.; Tsutsumida, M.; Tomiyama, T.; Tamura, T.; Fujimoto, J. Study on feasibility of service-oriented
products using life cycle simulation. J. Jpn. Soc. Des. Eng. 2001, 36, 517–526.
33. Fujimoto, J.; Umeda, Y.; Tamura, T.; Tomiyama, T.; Kimura, F. Development of service-oriented products
based on the inverse manufacturing concept. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2003, 37, 5398–5406. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Cooper, R.G.; Edgett, S.J.; Kleinschmidt, E.J. Optimizing the stage-gate process: What best-practice companies
do—I. Res. Technol. Manag. 2002, 45, 21–27.
35. Cooper, R.G.; Edgett, S.J.; Kleinschmidt, E.J. Optimizing the stage-gate process: What best-practice companies
do—II. Res. Technol. Manag. 2002, 45, 43–49.
36. Brügemann, L.M. Innovation of an Eco-efficient Product-Service Combination. Master’s thesis, Delft
University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands, 2000.
37. Chesbrough, H. Open innovation: Where we’ve been and where we’re going. Res. Technol. Manag. 2012, 55,
20–27. [CrossRef]
38. Emden, Z.; Calantone, R.J.; Droge, C. Collaborating for new product development: Selecting the partner
with maximum potential to create value. J. Prod. Innov. Manag. 2006, 23, 330–341. [CrossRef]
39. Saaty, T.L. The Analytic (Hierarchy) Process; McGraw-Hill: New York, NY, USA, 1980.
40. Saaty, T.L. Decision making for leaders. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 1985, 15, 450–452. [CrossRef]
41. Saaty, T.L. How to make a decision: The analytic hierarchy process. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 1990, 48, 9–26.
[CrossRef]
42. Vaidya, O.S.; Kumar, S. Analytic hierarchy process: An overview of applications. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2006, 169,
1–29. [CrossRef]
43. Soni, A.; Cohen, H. Successfully launching your product: Getting it right. Handb. Bus. Strateg. 2004, 5,
263–268. [CrossRef]
44. Kleinsmann, M.; Buijs, J.; Valkenburg, R. Understanding the complexity of knowledge integration in
collaborative new product development teams: A case study. J. Eng. Technol. Manag. 2010, 27, 20–32.
[CrossRef]
© 2015 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
471
sustainability
Review
Designing the Business Models for Circular
Economy—Towards the Conceptual Framework
Mateusz Lewandowski
Institute of Public Affairs, Faculty of Management and Social Communication, Jagiellonian University,
Lojasiewicza 4, Krakow 31-348, Poland; mateusz.lewandowski@uj.edu.pl; Tel.: +48-12-664-5642;
Fax: +48-12-664-5859
Academic Editor: Adam Jabło ´ nski
Received: 12 November 2015; Accepted: 30 December 2015; Published: 18 January 2016
Abstract: Switching from the current linear model of economy to a circular one has recently attracted
increased attention from major global companies e.g., Google, Unilever, Renault, and policymakers
attending the World Economic Forum. The reasons for this are the huge financial, social and
environmental benefits. However, the global shift from one model of economy to another also
concerns smaller companies on a micro-level. Thus, comprehensive knowledge on designing circular
business models is needed to stimulate and foster implementation of the circular economy. Existing
business models for the circular economy have limited transferability and there is no comprehensive
framework supporting every kind of company in designing a circular business model. This study
employs a literature review to identify and classify the circular economy characteristics according
to a business model structure. The investigation in the eight sub-domains of research on circular
business models was used to redefine the components of the business model canvas in the context
of the circular economy. Two new components—the take-back system and adoption factors—have
been identified, thereby leading to the conceptualization of an extended framework for the circular
business model canvas. Additionally, the triple fit challenge has been recognized as an enabler of the
transition towards a circular business model. Some directions for further research have been outlined,
as well.
Keywords: business models; circular economy; circular business model; sustainable business model;
business model design
1. Introduction
Switching from the current linear model of economy to a circular one would not only bring savings
of hundreds of billions US dollars to the EU alone, but also significantly reduce the negative impact on
the natural environment [1,2]. This is why the circular economy (CE) has attracted increased attention
as one of the most powerful and most recent moves towards sustainability [3,4]. The transition
to the circular economy entails four fundamental building blocks—materials and product design,
new business models, global reverse networks, and enabling conditions [5]. Switching an economy
to a circular one depends, on the one hand, on policymakers and their decisions [6]; on the other
hand, it depends on introducing circularity into their business models by business entities [7]. The
scope of interest of this study is limited to the latter, micro-level perspective of designing circular
business models.
Comprehensive knowledge on designing circular business models is needed to stimulate and
foster implementation of the circular economy on a micro-level. Existing knowledge provides several
well-elaborated and verified frameworks of business models, design patterns and tools to build a
business model [8,9]. Although many case studies revealed several types of circular business actions
or models [4,7], these models have limited transferability. There are very few studies covering, in
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43; doi:10.3390/su8010043 472 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
a more comprehensive manner, how a circular business model framework should look. Previous
research instead has taken the following approaches: building on a business model canvas (BMC)
and classifying the product-service system characteristics according to its structure [10]; significantly
reconstructing the BMC into a business cycle canvas to support practitioners in thinking in business
systems and beyond the individual business model [11]; using it as a part of a bigger framework of a
business model limited to eco-innovation [12]; or extending it to encompass wider social perspectives
of costs and benefits [13]. Other studies provide some steps for analyzing an existing business model
for potential opportunities to introduce circularity [7,14].
None of these reviewed studies have provided satisfactory answers to the following questions:
How may the principles of the circular economy be applied to a business model? What components
should a circular business model consist of to be applicable to every company? This study considers
the circular economy as a new contribution to the development of business model theory. Because
changing a company’s business model into a circular one is challenging, the following research provides
a conceptual framework of the circular business model to support practitioners in the transition process
from linear business models to more circular ones.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the concept of this study and methodological
remarks. Section 3 identifies the specificity of circular business models according to the eight
sub-domains of research in the area of business models proposed by Pateli and Giaglis [15]. Section 4
classifies the findings of the review according to the business model framework developed by
Osterwalder and Pigneur [8]. Thus, the nine building blocks of a business model framework are
characterized in the context of the circular economy. This section reveals the need to extend the
business model framework to make it more applicable to the circular economy. Section 5 provides
a proposition to address this need and presents a conceptualization of an extended framework of
business model—the circular business model canvas (CBMC). Section 6 provides suggestions for future
research. Section 7 presents the conclusions of the study.
2. The Method and Concept of the Study
In order to answer the questions how the principles of the circular economy can be applied to
a business model, and which universally applicable components are needed for a circular business
model, a narrative conceptual review has been employed.
The process was divided into three steps.
(1) Identification of the state of the art on business models in the CE (circular business models)
(2) Categorization of the initial body of literature according to the components of business
model structure
(3) Synthesis and development of the framework for a circular business model
General characteristics of
the main fields of research
on Circular Business
Models
Conceptualization of the
framework of the
Circular Business Model
Canvas
Step 1
(Section 3)
Step 2
(Section 4)
Step 3
(Section 5)
Identifying how Circular
Economy principles can be
applied to the components
of business model
Identifying how Circular
Economy principles exceed
the components of business
model
Identifying new
components of the
Circular Business Model
Figure 1. The Concept of Developing a Framework of Business Model for the Circular Economy.
473
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
2.1. Literature Review—Conceptual Frameworks for Categorizing the Research on Circular Business Models
This step identified the body of knowledge needed to obtain the answers for the research questions
in the next steps. The following academic databases were used for the literature search: EBSCO
Host, Google Scholar, Scopus, and ProQuest. Key words included variations on terms such as
circular economy, business model, circular business model, sustainable business model. Then a
complementary manual search was conducted on the websites of contributors to circular economy
to look for other relevant papers, reports and books. Also the anonymous reviewers suggested some
additional references.
This literature search generated articles on conceptualizing the state of the art on business models
in the circular economy (circular business models) according to the eight sub-domains of research
in the area of business models proposed by Pateli and Giaglis [15]. Those sub-domains include:
definitions, components, taxonomies, conceptual models, design methods and tools, adoption factors,
evaluation models, and change methodologies [15]. The research in the sub-domain of definitions
concerns defining the purpose, scope, and primary elements of a business model, as well as exploring
its relationships with other business concepts, such as strategy and business processes. Thus, in relation
to circular business models, a wider context of the circular economy must be explained in the first place.
Research on components of business models focuses on identifying its fundamental constructs and
constituent elements. They are derived from the main principles of CE. Research in the taxonomies’
sub-domain provides possible categorizations of circular business models into a number of typologies
based on various criteria. Investigations related to the conceptual models focus on identifying and
describing the relationship between the constituent elements of a circular business model, and include
their graphical representation. Exploration of the design methods and tools concerns the development
and use of methods, languages, standards and software to allow organizations to design, experiment,
and change business models in an easy and cost-effective way into more circular business models.
The research related to the adoption factors focuses on the factors that affect this change, as well as
on socioeconomic implications of circular business models. The sub-domain related to evaluation
models focuses on identifying criteria for assessing the feasibility, viability, and profitability of circular
business models or evaluating them against alternative or best practice cases. Investigation concerning
change methodologies pertain to guidelines, steps, and actions to be taken for transforming existing
business models into a more circular one. Table 1 below presents an overview of this step, and the
results are presented in the Section 2. This step identified the body of knowledge needed to obtain the
answers for the research questions in the next steps.
Table 1. Categorization of the literature devoted to the circular economy.
CBM Research Domains Authors
Definitions EMF Vol. 1&2 [2,4]; Joustra et al. [16]; Mentink [11]; Scott [3]; Lovins et al. [17];
Renswoude et al. [7]; Linder & Williander [18]; Ayres & Simonis [19]; Renner [20]
Components EMF Vol. 1. [4]; Renswoude et al. [7]; Boons and Lüdeke-Freund [21]; Laubscher and
Marinelli [22]; EMF [23]; Mentink [11]; Govindan, Soleimani, & Kannan [24]
Taxonomies
Lacy et al. [25]; Bakker et al. [26]; Damen [27]; EMF Vol. 1. [4]; Lacy et al. [28];
WRAP [29]; Renswoude et al. [7]; Planing [5]; Jong et al. [14]; Tukker and Tischner [30];
Van Ostaeyen et al. [31]; El-Haggar [32]; Bakker et al. [33]; Ludeke-Freund [12]; Moser
and Jakl [34]; Mentink [11]; Scott [3]; Bautista-Lazo [35]; Tukker [36]; EMF [6]
Conceptual Models
Mentink [11]; Wirtz [9]; Osterwalder and Pigneur [8]; Barquet et al. [10];
Osterwalder et al. [37]; Ludeke-Freund [12]; Dewulf [13]; Stubbs & Cocklin [38];
Roome and Louche [39]; Gauthier and Gilomen [40]; Abdelkafi and Tauscher [41];
Jabło ´ nski [42]; Upward and Jones [43]; Nilsson & Söderberg [44]
474
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
Table 1. Cont.
CBM Research Domains Authors
Design Methods and Tools
Joustra et al. [16]; Jong et al. [14]; Scott [3]; Renswoude et al. [7]; Osterwalder and
Pigneur [8]; Mentink [11]; Barquet et al. [10]; Jabło ´ nski [42]; Parlikad et al. [45];
El-Haggar [32]; Guinée [46]
Adoption Factors
Winter [47]; Planing [5]; Lacy et al. [28]; Joustra et al. [16]; Scott [3]; Parlikad et al. [45];
Mentink [11]; Laubscher and Marinelli [22]; EMF Vol. 1. [4]; Renswoude et al. [7];
Scheepens et al. [48]; EMF [6]; Jong et al. [14]; Beuren et al. [49]; Jabło ´ nski [50];
Pearce [51]; Linder & Williander [18]; Parlikad, et al. [45]; Beuren et al. [49]; Jabło ´ nski
(2015); Zairul et al. [52]; Roos [53]; Bechtel et al. [54]; UNEP [55]; Besch [56];
Heese et al. [57];Walsh [58]; Firnkorn & Muller [59]; Shafiee & Stec [60]
Evaluation Models Winter [47]; Laubscher and Marinelli [22]; Mentink [11]; EMF [23]; Andersson &
Stavileci [61]; Jasch [62]; Jasch [63]; Gale [64]
Change Methodologies Scott [3]; Roome & Louche [39]; Gauthier & Gilomen [40]
2.2. Categorization of the Initial Body of Literature According to the Components of Business Model Structure
The second step identified how the idea of circular economy can be applied to each component of
the business model. This approach was inspired by Barquet et al. [10], who used a similar one for the
characteristics of product-service systems (PSS). Business model structure was defined on the basis
of the business model canvas (BMC) developed by Osterwalder and Pigneur [8]. BMC was chosen
due to the ease of its practical application, complexity of components, worldwide recognition, and
previous contributions to the development of circular business models [10–12]. However, a relatively
large proportion of the literature pointed out several ways of applying the principles of the circular
economy which exceeded the existing components of the business model. Table 2 below presents an
overview of this step, and the results are presented in Section 3.
Table 2. Example categorization of the literature devoted to the circular economy according to a
business model structure.
BM components Authors
Partners Scott [3]; Joustra et al. [16]; El-Haggar [32]; Renswoude et al. [7]; Sheu [65];
Robinson et al. [66]; EMF Vol. 1. [4]
Key Activities
El-Haggar [32]; Scott [3]; WRAP [29]; Renswoude et al. [7]; Lacy et al. [28]; Rifkin [67];
Lacy et al. [25]; Joustra et al. [16]; EMF Vol. 3 [1]; Laubscher and Marinelli [22]; EMF
Vol. 1. [4]; EMF [23]; EMF [6]
Key Resources Planing [5]; Renswoude et al. [7]; Lacy et al. [28]; El-Haggar [32]; EMF [23];
Freyermuth [68]; Scott [3]
Value Proposition and
Customer Segments
Jong et al. [14]; Planing [5]; Renswoude et al. [7]; Lacy et al. [28]; Parlikad et al. [45];
Bakker et al. [33]; El-Haggar [32]; Lacy et al. [25]; Scott [3]; EMF Vol. 1. [4]; Tukker and
Tischner [30]; Tukker [36]; Laubscher and Marinelli [22]; Bakker et al. [26]; EMF [6]
Customer Relations Renswoude et al. [7]; Recycling 2.0 [69]; Lacy et al. [25]
Channels EMF [6]; Recycling 2.0 [69]; EMF [23]
Cost Structure Laubscher and Marinelli [22]; Mentink [11]; Subramanian and Gunasekaran [70];
Sivertsson and Tell [71]; Berning and Venter [72]; Barquet et al. [10]
Revenue Streams Van Ostaeyen et al. [31]; Renswoude et al. [7]; Tukker [36]
Additional Issues Related to
Circular Economy
Material loops: EMF Vol. 1&2 [2,4]; Mentink [11]; Renswoude et al. [7]; Lacy et al. [28];
WRAP [29]; EMF Vol. 3 [1]; Govindan et al. [24]; El-Haggar [32]; EMF [23];
Freyermuth [68]; Scott [3]; Lacy et al. [25]; Planing [5];
Adoption factors: Planing [5]; Scott [3]; El-Haggar [32]; Laubscher and Marinelli [22];
Lacy et al. [28]; Joustra et al. [16]; Jong et al. [14]; Renswoude et al. [7]; Barquet et al. [10];
Mentink [11]; Guinée [46]; EMF [23]; EMF [4]; EMF [6]; Parlikad et al. [45]; Stubbs &
Cocklin [38]; Skelton and Pattis [73]; Winter [47]
475
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
2.3. Synthesis and Development of the Framework of Circular Business Model
Pursuing better answers to the research questions resulted in undertaking step 3. This step
synthesizes how the circular economy principles apply to each component of the business model, and
proposes the new components of the circular business model. These components pertain to the ways
in which the CE principles exceeded the popular business model framework. Additionally, advantages
and disadvantages of the new framework were outlined. These results are presented in the Section 4.
3. Research on Circular Business Models—The Review
3.1. Definitions
Although it is a contemporary movement, the circular economy is based on old ideas [74]; it is
thus reasonable to outline its specificity. This includes the definitions, the origins of the movement,
and its main principles. CE was probably first defined and conceptualized in the Ellen MacArthur
Foundations report, as “an industrial system that is restorative or regenerative by intention and
design” [4]. This means pursuing and creating the opportunities for a shift from an “end-of-life”
concept to Cradle-to-Cradle™, from using unrenewable energy towards using renewable, from using
toxic chemicals to their elimination, from much waste to eliminating waste through the superior design
of materials, products, systems, and also business models [4]. The circular economy becomes a new
vision of the treatment of resources, energy, value creation and entrepreneurship [16].
Linder and Williander [18] define a circular business model as “a business model in which the
conceptual logic for value creation is based on utilizing the economic value retained in products after use in the
production of new offerings” (p. 2). Mentink [11] defines CE as “an economic system with closed material
loops,” and a circular business model as “the rationale of how an organization creates, delivers and captures
value with and within closed material loops” (p. 35). He argues that circular business models do not
necessarily aim to balance ecological, social and ecological needs, in contrast to business models,
although at the same time they can serve sustainability goals [11]. However, another approach is
also supported in the literature. Most recently, Scott [3] provided a useful conceptualization of CE
in relation to sustainability. He argues for understanding the circular economy as “a concept used to
describe a zero-waste industrial economy that profits from two types of material inputs: (1) biological materials
are those that can be reintroduced back into the biosphere in a restorative manner without harm or waste (i.e:
they breakdown naturally); and, (2) technical materials, which can be continuously re-used without harm or
waste” (p. 6). In turn, he defines sustainability as the capacity to continue into the long term and, at the
same time, as a mechanism that enables the circular economy to work [3].
The general concept underlying the circular economy has been developed by many schools of
thought, such as Regenerative Design, Performance Economy, Cradle to Cradle, Industrial Ecology,
Biomimicry, Blue Economy, Permaculture, Natural Capitalism, Industrial Metabolism and Industrial
Symbiosis [2,4,17,19,20]. Those schools of thought are complementary to each other and provided the
foundation for the main principles of this new approach to economy [2,4,7,16]:
(1) Design out waste/Design for reuse
(2) Build resilience through diversity
(3) Rely on energy from renewable sources
(4) Think in systems
(5) Waste is food/Think in cascades/Share values (symbiosis)
This variety of concepts supports Scott’s [3] approach to the relation between sustainability and
circular economy.
3.2. Components
The fundamental constructs and constituent elements of circular business models can be derived
from the main principles of the circular economy. In the literature, such components are understood and
476
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
defined variously, for instance: the ReSOLVE (regenerate, share, optimize, loop, virtualize, exchange)
framework [4,23], ways of circular value creation [7], normative requirements for business models [21],
and areas for integration [22].
There are six business actions to implement the principles of the circular economy and
which represent major circular business opportunities depicted by the ReSOLVE framework [23].
Regenerate signifies the shift to renewable energy and materials. It is related to returning recovered
biological resources to the biosphere. Thus it aims to reclaim, retain, and regenerate the health of
ecosystems. Share actions aim at maximizing utilization of products by sharing them among users.
It may be realized through peer-to-peer sharing of private products or public sharing of a pool of
products. Sharing means also reusing products as long as they are technically acceptable to use
(e.g., second-hand), and prolonging their life through maintenance, repair, and design-enhancing
durability. Optimise actions are focused on increasing the performance/efficiency of a product and
removing waste in the production process and in the supply chain. They may also be related to
leveraging big data, automation, remote sensing, and steering. What is important is that optimization
does not require changing the product or the technology. Loop actions aim at keeping components
and materials in closed loops. The higher priority is given to inner loops. Virtualize actions assume to
deliver particular utility virtually instead of materially. Exchange actions are focused on replacing old
materials with advanced non-renewable materials and/or with applying new technologies (e.g., 3D
printing). It may also be related to choosing new products and services [23].
Renswoude et al. [7] identify similar ways of circular value creation, pertaining to the short cycle,
where products and services are maintained, repaired and adjusted, to the long cycle which extends
the lifetime of existing products and processes, to cascades based on creating new combinations
of resources and material components and purchasing upcycled waste streams, to pure circles in
which resources and materials are 100% reused, to dematerialized services offered instead of physical
products and to production on demand.
Other studies identified four normative requirements for business models for sustainable
innovation, grounded in wider concepts such as sustainable development [21]. The first is a value
proposition reflecting the balance of economic, ecological and social needs. The second is a supply
chain engaging suppliers into sustainable supply chain management (materials cycles). The third is a
customer interface, motivating customers to take responsibility for their consumption. The fourth is a
financial model, mainly reflecting an appropriate distribution of economic costs and benefits among
actors involved in the business model [21]. Boons and Lüdeke-Freund [21] (p. 13) also noticed that
comparable conceptual notions of sustainable business models did not exist.
Mentink [11] (p. 34) used a similar approach to the business model as Frankenberger et al. [75],
and outlined the changes of business model components needed for developing a more circular service
model, such as:
‚ value propositions (what?)—products should become fully reused or recycled, which requires
reverse logistics systems, or firms should turn towards product-service system (PSS) and sell
performance related to serviced products
‚ activities, processes, resources and capabilities (how?)—products have to be made in specific
processes, with recycled materials and specific resources, which may require not only specific
capabilities but also creating reverse logistics systems and maintaining relationships with other
companies and customers to assure closing of material loops
‚ revenue models (why?)—selling product-based services charged according to their use
‚ customers or customer interfaces (who?)—selling “circular” products or services may require prior
changes of customer habits or, if this is not possible, even changes of customers
Laubscher and Marinelli [22] identified six key areas for integration of the circular economy
principles with the business model:
477
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
(1) Sales model—a shift from selling volumes of products towards selling services and retrieving
products after first life from customers
(2) Product design/material composition—the change concerns the way products are designed and
engineered to maximize high quality reuse of product, its components and materials
(3) IT/data management—in order to enable resource optimization a key competence is required,
which is the ability to keep track of products, components and material data
(4) Supply loops—turning towards the maximization of the recovery of own assets where profitable
and to maximization of the use of recycled materials/used components in order to gain additional
value from product, component and material flows
(5) Strategic sourcing for own operations—building trusted partnerships and long-term relationships
with suppliers and customers, including co-creation
(6) HR/incentives—a shift needs adequate culture adaptation and development of capabilities,
enhanced by training programs and rewards
One of the most important components of circular business models is the reversed supply-chain
logistics. A comprehensive review on this subject has been done by Govindan, Soleimani, and
Kannan [24].
3.3. Taxonomies
In the literature, there are several propositions of how to categorize business models. Most of
them are very similar and use the criterion of the source of value creation (e.g., [4,7,25]). Few authors
proposed other criteria, such as sources of value in a product-service systems [5,14,30], before-the-event
techniques of cleaner production [32], design strategies for product life extension [33], cycle of
product/component/material circulation in material loops [5], or mixed criteria [12]. However, the
typologies are somewhat overlapping, and the distinction criteria are sometimes blurred. An overview
of the circular business models, systematized according to the ReSOLVE framework, is presented in
Table 3.
478
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
Table 3. An overview of circular business model types.
Classification Criteria Model Literature Sources Explanation Example(s)
Regenerate
Energy recovery Damen [27]; Lacy et al. [28] The conversion of non-recyclable waste materials
into useable heat, electricity, or fuel
Ralphs and Food 4 Less installed
an “anaerobic digestion” system
Circular Supplies Lacy et al. [28]; EMF [23] Using renewable energy Iberdrola
Efficient buildings Scott [3] Locating business activities in efficient buildings Phillips Eco-Enterprise Center
Sustainable product locations Scott [3] Locating business in eco-industrial parks Kalundborg Eco-industrial Park
Chemical leasing Moser and Jakl [34]
The producer mainly sells the functions performed
by the chemical, so the environmental impacts and
use of hazardous chemical are reduced
Safechem
Share
Maintenance and Repair
Lacy et al. [28]; WRAP [76];
Bakker et al. [33]; Planing [5]; Damen
[27]
Product life cycle is extended through maintenance
and repair Patagonia, Giroflex
Collaborative Consumption,
Sharing Platforms, PSS: Product
renting, sharing or pooling
Lacy et al. [28]; Lacy et al. [25]; WRAP
[76]; Planing [5]; Tukker [36]; Jong et
al. [14]
Enable sharing use, access, or ownership of product
between members of the public or between
businesses.
BlaBlaCar, Airbnb, ThredUP,
PSS: Product lease Tukker [36]; Jong et al. [14]; WRAP
[76]; Exclusive use of a product without being the owner Mud Jeans, Dell, Leasedrive,
Stone Rent-a-PC
PSS: Availability based Van Ostaeyen, et al. [31]; Mentink [11] The product or service is available for the customer
for a specific period of time GreenWheels
PSS: Performance based Van Ostaeyen, et al. [31]; Zairul et al.
2015 [52]
The revenue is generated according to delivered
solution, effect or demand-fulfilment
Philips’s “Pay per Lux” solution;
the need for new housing model
for young starters in Malaysia
Incentivized return and reuse or
Next Life Sales
WRAP [76]; Mentink [11]; Lacy et al.
[25]; Damen [27]
Customers return used products for an agreed value.
Collected products are resold or refurbished and
sold
Vodafone Red Hot, Tata
Motors Assured
Upgrading Planing [5]; Mentink [11] Replacing modules or components with better
quality ones Phoneblocks
Product Attachment and Trust Mentink [11] Creating products that will be loved, liked or
trusted longer Apple products
Bring your own device WRAP [76] Users bring their own devices to get the access
to services,
Citrix pays employees for
bringing own computers
Hybrid model Bakker et al. [26] A durable product contains short-lived consumables Océ-Canon printers and copiers
Gap-exploiter model Bakker et al. [26]; Mentink [11]
Exploits “lifetime value gaps” or leftover value in
product systems. (e.g., shoes lasting longer than
their soles).
printer cartridges outlasting the
ink they contain
479
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
Table 3. Cont.
Classification Criteria Model Literature Sources Explanation Example(s)
Optimise
Asset management WRAP [76] Internal collection, reuse, refurbishing and resale of
used products FLOOW2, P2PLocal
Produce on demand Renswoude et al. [7]; WRAP [76],
Scott [3]
Producing when demand is present and products
were ordered
Alt-Berg Bootmakers, Made,
Dell Computer Company
Waste reduction, Good
housekeeping, Lean thinking, Fit
thinking
Renswoude et al. [7]; Scott [3];
El-Haggar [32]; Bautista-Lazo [35]
Waste reduction in the production process and
before Nitech rechargeable batteries
PSS: Activity
management/outsourcing Tukker [36] More efficient use of capital goods, materials, human
resources through outsourcing Outsourcing
Loop
Remanufacture, Product
Transformation
Damen [27]; Planing [5]; Lacy et al.
[25]
Restoring a product or its components to “as
new” quality Bosch remanufactured car parts
Recycling, Recycling 2.0, Resource
Recovery
Lacy et al. [25] Damen [27] Planing [5];
Lacy et al. [28]
Recovering resources out of disposed products or
by-products PET bottles, Desso
Upcycling Lacy et al. [28] Mentink [11]; Planing
[5] Materials are reused and their value is upgraded De Steigeraar (design and build
of furniture from scrap wood)
Circular Supplies Renswoude et al. [7]; Lacy et al. [28] Using supplies from material loops, bio based- or
fully recyclable Royal DSM
Virtualize Dematerialized services WRAP [76]; Renswoude et al. [7] Shifting physical products, services or processes
to virtual Spotify (music online)
Exchange New technology EMF [6] New technology of production WinSun 3D printing houses
480
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
3.4. Conceptual Models
The relationships between constituent elements of a circular business model have been
conceptualized in the literature. Every business model is both linear and circular to some extent [7,11].
This is because every company optimizes its processes, virtualizes products or processes (using e-mails
instead of traditional letters) and/or uses some resources from material loops, and thus introduces
some principles of the circular economy, albeit not necessarily deliberately. Renswoude et al. [7] put it
differently—“100% circular business models do not exist (yet). Not creating any waste at all is difficult
to achieve for physical and practical reasons (p. 2)”. For this reason, the main conceptual frameworks
of business models apply to the circular economy. However, some frameworks of circular business
models have been developed for either type.
There are quite many conceptual frameworks of business models in general [75,77–82]. Thus,
a further systematization became a reasonable direction of research. And so, there are two more
comprehensive propositions, one by Wirtz [9], and one by Osterwalder and Pigneur [8]. Wirtz
(2011) [9] made a systematic overview of the business model concept, and proposed an integrated
business model consisting of nine partial models divided into three main components—strategic,
customer and market, value creation. The strategic component comprises three models regarding
the strategy (mission, strategic positions and development paths, value proposition), resources (core
competencies and assets), and network (business model networks and partners). The customer
and market components consist of customer model (customer relationships/target group, channel
configuration, customer touchpoint), market offer model (competitors, market structure, value
offering/products and services), and revenue model (revenue streams and revenue differentiation).
The value creation component encompasses production of goods and services (manufacturing model
and value generation), procurement model (resource acquisition and information), and financial model
(financing model, capital model and cost structure model).
A more recognized and applied framework of a business model distinguishes nine building
blocks [83], and is conceptualized as the business model canvas (BMC) [8]. The BMC consists of [8,10]:
(1) Customer segments that an organization serves
(2) Value propositions that seek to solve customers’ problems and satisfy their needs
(3) Channels which an organization uses to deliver, communicate and sell value propositions
(4) Customer relationships which an organization builds and maintains with each customer segment
(5) Revenue streams resulting from value propositions successfully offered to customers
(6) Key resources as the assets required to offer and deliver the aforementioned elements
(7) Key activities which are performed to offered and deliver the aforementioned elements
(8) Key partnerships being a network of suppliers and partners that support the business model
execution by providing some resources and performing some activities
(9) Cost structure comprising all the costs incurred when operating a business model
Most recently, value proposition design has been developed, and comprises of six building blocks,
which are a detailed description of the two BM canvas blocks—value propositions and customer
segments [37]. Value proposition is composed of the products and services offered to the customer, the
relievers of customers pains, and the creators of customer gains pertaining to the tasks and jobs he or
she needs to accomplish with the assistance of the offered product or service. Thus, on the customer’s
side are the jobs, pains and gains related to doing the jobs. The visualization of both canvases are
presented in Figure 2.
481
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
Figure 2. The Business Model Canvas and the Value Proposition Canvas. Source: Osterwalder and
Pigneur [8] and Osterwalder et al., (2014) [37]. Reproduced with permission from Strategyzer.com and
Strategyzer AG.
The BM canvas has been recognized and used for further conceptualizations of circular and
sustainable business models, such as Barquet et al. [10], Lüdeke-Freund [12], Dewulf [13], Mentink [11],
and Nilsson and Söderberg [44]. Barquet et al. [10] used the BM canvas for identification and
classification of the product service systems’ characteristics according to a business model structure.
Moreover, the authors used it as design tool for a circular business model [10]. Lüdeke-Freund [12]
applied the business model canvas (BMC) developed by Osterwalder and Pigneur [8] to the context
482
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
of eco-innovation. In Lüdeke-Freund’s framework, the canvas is a central component, but linked
with others, both preceding and subsequent. The infrastructure management (partners, resources,
activities) is highly impacted by the development of marketable eco-innovations, barriers of sustainable
development, and marketing eco-innovations. Thus, contextual factors are important enablers for a
business model to operate in practice. On the other hand, eco-innovations create an extended customer
value (a mix of customer public value, customer equity and customer value). Dewulf [13] developed
an extended business model canvas with two additional components—societal costs and societal
benefits. Mentink [11] developed a business cycle canvas, which applies the concept of business cycle
to the business model framework. This proposition is focused on the circulation of materials in a
closed loops, and thus is more useful to analyze if the company’s network will support material loops.
Nilsson and Söderberg [44] developed a business model canvas adjusted for the urban mining segment
and evaluated the business model element differences between the traditional C and D and urban
mining industry.
Some other conceptual frameworks exist in the literature related to sustainability. For instance,
Stubbs and Cocklin [38] developed a case study-based conceptualization of a sustainability business
model, consisting of two types of attributes—structural and cultural ones. Each type has its economic,
environmental, social, and holistic characteristics. Structural attributes are depicted by:
‚ Economic characteristics, such as external bodies expecting triple bottom line performance,
lobbying for changes to taxation system and legislation to support sustainability, keeping
capital local
‚ Environmental characteristics, such as a threefold strategy (offsets, sustainable, restorative),
closed-loop systems, implementation of services model, operating in industrial ecosystems and
stakeholder networks
‚ Social characteristics, such as understanding stakeholder’s needs and expectations, educating and
consulting stakeholders
Holistic characteristics, such as cooperation and collaboration; triple bottom line approach to
performance; implementing demand-driven model; adapting organization to sustainability.
Cultural attributes are depicted by:
‚ Economic characteristics, such as considering profit as a means to do something more
(“higher purpose”), not as an end, which is also a reason for shareholders to invest
‚ Environmental characteristics, such as treating nature as a stakeholder
‚ Social characteristics, such as balancing stakeholders’ expectations, sharing resources among
stakeholders, and building relationships
‚ Holistic characteristics, such as focusing on medium to long-term effects, and on
reducing consumption
Most recent contributions to conceptual models concern the dynamics between components of
the business model. For instance, Roome and Louche [39] developed process model of business model
change for sustainability, which explains how new business models for sustainability are fashioned
through the interactions between individuals and groups inside and outside companies. Gauthier and
Gilomen [40] analyzed transformations of the elements of sustainable business model and identified a
typology of such changes (see Subsection 3.8 in this paper). Abdelkafi and Täuscher [41] developed a
system dynamics-based representation of business models for sustainability. Not only has the dynamic
of internal business model components been researched, but also the dynamics in relation to the
business model environment. One of the key issues in this regard pertains to networks. Jabło ´ nski [42]
outlined the process of transition from an idea to the operationalization of the business model by
searching for business model components from the network. However, the static approach is also
being investigated. For example, Upward and Jones [43] developed the strongly sustainable business
model ontology. Another approach proposed by Bautista-Lazo and Short [84] conceptualized an All
483
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
Seeing Eye of Business model, which addresses the types of waste and their potential as a profit or
loss generator.
3.5. Design Methods and Tools
There are several design methods and tools for the business model in the literature. Some of them
focus on enhancing the design process [3,7,8,10], and others are used in particular situations and for
particular business models [32,42,46].
Joustra et al. [16] and Jong et al. [14] identified five steps to support for small and medium
enterprises (SMEs) to enter the circular economy. The first two steps comprise reading about the
CE, and learning about the readiness of the company, partners and stakeholders in the supply chain
for CE. The next two steps suggest evaluating redesign opportunities that might bring the products
into a more circular business model, and to understand the service that a company could potentially
deliver and how the model needs to be redesigned to enable this. The last step tests whether the value
delivered is the value that customers expect and will pay for.
Scott [3] proposed the 7-P model as a starting point toward understanding and applying the
mechanism of the circular economy in a business. This model takes the practitioner’s approach and
describes seven main components, which can be divided into three steps. The first is to learn and
understand the fundamentals of the circular economy, and what the change will concern, and decide
on establishing sustainability as an objective (prepare). The next step is to organize and implement the
mechanisms of the circular economy related to the process, preservation, people, place, product, and
production. The last step is to enable and support implementation of CE, mainly through building
teams and managing change (People).
Renswoude et al. [7] developed the business model scan, a methodology to enhance a transition
of the company into a more circular form. It consists of six process stages about which many
questions are asked. Those questions are related to value proposition, design, supply, manufacturing,
use, and next life. Osterwalder and Pigneur [8] proposed five stages of business model design
process, encompassing mobilize, understand, design, implement, and manage. This methodology
is supported by the business model canvas (described in Section 3.4). BMC has been applied to
research and design circular business models [10,11]. Jablonski [42] distinguished eleven stages
of the design and operationalization of the company’s technological business model embedded in
the network. Parlikad et al. [45] identified the information requirements for end-of-life decision
making and established a possible set of characteristics of a lifecycle information system to support
management. They also reviewed existing product lifecycle information systems and divided them into
two categories. Design/disassembly data-sharing systems encompass: Inverse Manufacturing Product
Recycling Information System (IMPRIS), Recycling Passport, Products Lifecycle Management System
(PLMS), Integrated Recycling Data Management System (ReDaMa). Lifecycle information monitoring
systems comprises of: Information System for Product Recovery (ISPR), Life Cycle Data Acquisition
System (LCDA), Green Port [45]. Cleaner production audits are undertaken to identify opportunities
for cleaner production. The methodology for the cleaner production opportunity assessment has
been outlined by El-Haggar [32] (p. 29), and consists of many activities related to and focused on
the following: team, pre-audit, surrounding environment, operations and processes, inputs and
outputs, wasteful processes, material and energy balance, opportunities, priorities, implementation,
assessment, process sustainability, sustainable development. Another important method is life cycle
assessment [85] which is explained as “a tool for the analysis of the environmental burden of products at all
stages in their life cycle—from the extraction of resources, through the production of materials, product parts and
the product itself, and the use of the product to the management after it is discarded, either by reuse, recycling or
final disposal (in effect, therefore, ‘from the cradle to the grave’)” [46] (pp. 5–6). Scott [3] (p. 81) also suggests
that environmental audits, such as compliance audit, waste audit, waste disposal audit, water audit,
can be used. Mentink [11] discussed a few other methods and tools, such as: New Framework on
484
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
Circular Design, Practical Guide for PSS Development, Circular Economy Toolkit, Play it Forward, 4-I
Framework, and Sustainable Business Model Canvas.
3.6. Adoption Factors
Factors affecting CBM adoption are mostly related to general factors [5,47], human
resources [3,16,28], political system and legislation [3,6], IT and data management [3,45], and business
risks [11]. There are also crucial socioeconomic implications, justifying the efforts towards CE [4,7,22],
and other enablers such as leadership, collaboration, motivation through the concept itself, and
customer behavior [53].
General factors encompass conditions which need to be fulfilled to secure profitability of closed
circles. Winter [47] (p. 16) points out five of them: sufficiently valuable materials/products, control
of product or material chain, ease of reuse, remanufacture or recycle materials/products, predictable
demand for future products, keeping materials/products concentrated and uncontaminated.
Planing [5], however, argued that customer irrationality, conflict of interest within companies,
misaligned profit-share along the supply chain, and geographic dispersion could be the reasons
for rejecting circular business models. Scheepens et al. [48] argue that transition to CE is impacted by
different factors on several levels: societal, regulatory, services and infrastructure, and product and
technology. Sivertsson and Tell [71] identified barriers to business model innovation in the agricultural
context for each of the nine building blocks of the business model canvas (by Osterwalder and
Pigneur [8]). Pearce identified six kinds of customers whose needs may be satisfied by the companies
offering remanufactured products. These types comprise the customers who (1) need to retain a specific
product because it has a technically defined role in their current processes; (2) want to avoid the need
to re-specify, re-approve or re-certify a product; (3) make low utilization of new equipment; (4) wish
to continue using a product which has been discontinued by the original manufacturer; (5) want
to extend the service lives of used products, whether discontinued or not; and (6) are interested in
environmentally friendly products [51]. Linder and Williander [18] outlined challenges regarding
remanufacturing, such as: considerable expertise and knowledge of the product; efficient product
retrieval; suitable types of products; risk of cannibalization if the new, longer-lasting products reduce
sales of the previous products; fashion changes; a financial risk for the producer if the offer is to be
rented; increased operational risk; lack of supporting law, policy and regulations; and compatibility
with the business models of partners.
Regarding the role of human resources in a company shift towards the circular economy, various
suggestions have been made. On the basis of successful waste elimination schemes, Scott [3] formulated
general recommendations for creating teams related to team members and team size, volunteers, goals,
motivation, maintaining links with organization, organizing team meetings, positive thinking, and
leadership. Lacy et al. [28] (p. 18) identified five capabilities of successful circular leaders (business
planning and strategy, innovation and product development, in sourcing and manufacturing, sales
and marketing, reverse logistics and return chains). Other researchers also emphasized the role of
leadership, mostly pertaining to the appreciation of the new strategic direction, understanding its
benefits and risks, and the ability to establish a common understanding in the business [53,54].
Joustra et al. [16] (p. 11) identified eight elementary skills for any circular economy project
team, such as: entrepreneurial and developing, craftsmanship aimed at product/services, systems
thinking and capability of identifying causal loops, future oriented and out-of-the-box, celebrating
diversity, addressing insecurities, designing circular systems, products and services, and being
creative, innovative and connected. Laubscher and Marinelli [22] give some insights from the practice
and emphasized the role of adequate culture adaptation and development of capabilities in a BM
transformation towards CE. This can be obtained through dedicated training programs, performance
and rewards schemes, personal targets and bonuses for sales managers.
Others argue that policymakers at all government levels (municipal, regional, national, and
supranational) play an important role in the circular economy [3,6]. There are two broad and
485
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
complementary policymaking strategies to accelerate the circular economy: fixing market and
regulatory failures, and stimulating market activity by, for example, setting targets, changing public
procurement policy, creating collaboration platforms and providing financial or technical support to
businesses [6].
Parlikad, et al. [45] and Scott [3] (p. 79) argue that IT and data management systems are essential
for the circular economy, because they allow to keep track of products, components and material data.
This strongly supports effective reverse logistics systems, material loops (also cross-industry) and
reuse of components.
Some business risks of service models (or PSS) have also been identified in the literature. They
are related to the fact that (a) owning a product is preferred if the user is emotionally attached to the
product or the product has an important intangible value, impacting, for instance, the owner’s social
status; (b) result or function-oriented services need a good explanation and description, which may
increase transaction costs; (c) the service provider must predict and control the risks, uncertainties and
responsibilities related to selling a result-oriented service [11,14,16]. Moreover, validating a circular
business model always has a higher business risk than validating a corresponding traditional, linear
business model [18].
Regarding the impact of the circular economy, there are three main winners: economies, companies
and user/consumers [3,4,7,55]. CE advantages for economies are related to e.g., the impact on
economic growth, material cost savings, mitigation of price volatility and supply risks, significant
job growth in services, employment market resilience [4,49]. Laubscher and Marinelli [22] point that
companies can gain financial and reputational value. Others argue that CE will give the companies
new profit possibilities, increase competitive advantage and build resilience against several strategic
challenges [4,56,57]. Detailed advantages could concern: innovation and competitive advantage,
additional revenue streams, long-term contracts, customer loyalty and feedback, multiple benefits
of internal resource management, and beneficial partnerships throughout the value chain [7,58–60].
Customer and user benefits mainly comprise of increased choice at lower cost; however, there are also
some social benefits, like a contribution against climate change [4,52].
Importantly, adaptation factors change in time and those changes also impact the evolution of
business models [50].
3.7. Evaluation Models
The criteria for assessing the feasibility, viability, and profitability of circular business models
must be adjusted to the micro, meso and macro-level of implementation [47]. On the micro-level
Laubscher and Marinelli [22] argue for measuring the reduced ecological footprint, direct financial
value through recovery of materials and assets, and top line growth through new business models.
A more extended set of key performance indicators could encompass a percentage of: revenues from
repairs, reused parts, refurbished products, recycled material used product value after period X,
revenue from second-hand products, times of reuse of resource, technical lifetime value of by-products,
by-products used, separability of resources, toxic materials used, and products leased [11]. Anderson
and Stavileci [61] proposed several criteria for evaluation of the business model’s validity for the
circular economy, such as: turnover possibility, margins, capital intensiveness, implementation time,
dependence on supplier, possible usage of recycled materials, usage of unsustainable materials, benefits
from additive manufacturing, percentage of lifecycle, product oriented, and service oriented. There
are also some guidelines for accounting the costs of material flow (MFCA) [62–64].
On the macro-level, there are several measurements for three CE principles [23]. Measurements
concerning the principles of preservation and enhancing natural capital by controlling finite stocks
and balancing renewable resource flow, comprise degradation-adjusted net value add (NVA) as a
primary metric, and annual monetary benefit of ecosystem services, annual degradation, and overall
remaining stock as secondary metrics. Measurements for the principle of optimization of resource
yields by circulating products, components and materials in use at the highest utility at all times in
486
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
both technical and biological cycles, encompass as a primary metric GDP-generated per unit of net
virgin finite material input, and product utilization, product depreciation/lifetime, and material value
retention or value of virgin materials as secondary metrics. Measurements for the principle of fostering
system effectiveness by revealing and designing out negative externalities, consist of cost of land, air,
water, and noise pollution, as a primary metric, and toxic substances in food systems, climate change,
congestion, and health impacts as secondary metrics [23].
3.8. Change Methodologies
Scott [3] (pp. 103–109) argues that basic change management theories, like the Force Field Theory,
Three-Stage Approach to Change Behavior, sources of staff resistance to change, can be successfully
applied to manage the transition from a linear business model towards a circular one. However,
other studies provide theories more specific to CE. For example, the model of the process of changing
business model for sustainability explains how new business models for sustainability are fashioned
through the interactions between individuals and groups inside and outside companies [39]. Gauthier
and Gilomen [40] identified a typology of business model transformations toward sustainability:
(1) Business model as usual—if there are no transformations to business model elements
(2) Business model adjustment—if marginal modifications to one element of BMs occur
(3) Business model innovation—if major BM transformations were implemented
(4) Business model redesign—if a complete rethinking of organizations’ BM elements results in
radically new value propositions
4. Circular Economy and the Components of Business Model
4.1. Value Propositions Fitting Customer Segments (Value Proposition Design)
The core component of the circular business model is the value proposition. Circular value
proposition offers a product, product-related service or a pure service [14]. This offer must allow
the user/consumer to do what is needed, reduce inconveniences which the consumer/user would
experience, and provide additional benefits [37].
Circular products, although ownership-based [5], have several specific features related to the CE
principles. Circular products enable product-life extension through maintenance, repair, refurbishment,
redistribution, upgrading and reselling [5,7,28,33,45]. They are designed to enhance reusing, recycling,
and cascading. This requires a modular design and choosing materials that allow cascading, reusing,
remanufacturing, recycling, or safe disposal. Thus, such products are 100% ready to circulate in the
closed material loops. Moreover, product design should allow using less raw material or energy or to
minimize emissions [3,25,32]. Circular products can be also dematerialized and offered not as physical
but as virtual products [4,7].
In a product-service system a company offers access to the product but retains its ownership.
It is an alternative to the traditional model of “buy and own”. This is a way of reducing customer
pains, creating gains, and getting the jobs done through offering product-oriented services or advice,
use-oriented services including product leasing, renting, pooling, and pay-per-service unit, or
result-oriented services, comprising outsourcing and functional result [14,25,28,30,36]. Some examples
comprise: Philips pay-per light [22] or GreenWheels’ shared car use, hours of thrust in a Rolls-Royce,
or “Power-by-the-Hour” jet engines [26].
Circular value propositions related to services may concern shifting their traditional form to a
virtual one (e.g., virtual travel) [4,6,7].
Collaborative consumption related to product sharing/renting or product pooling can bring cost
savings, services tailored for customer needs, and additional benefits. For instance, BlaBlaCar offers
not only cheap transportation possibilities and route connections unavailable by public transport, but
also social gains (see blablacar.com). Some other sharing-based value propositions concern sharing
487
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
residence, parking, appliances/tools sharing, office, and flexible seating, which may require some
specially developed platforms [4,7,28].
Usually there are some incentives offered to the users/consumers [76]: for example, buy-back
programs like Vodafone—New Every Year/Red Hot [1]. In this case, incentives are a source of value
for the customer (part of value proposition), and products, components or materials collected back
contain a value retrieved by the company.
The value proposition must be appropriate for particular customer segments, for specific types of
customers [51].
4.2. Channels
One of the strongest shifts towards a circular business model regarding channels is virtualization.
This means that an organization can sell a virtualized value proposition and deliver it virtually (selling
digital products, like music in mp3 format) and/or sell value propositions via virtual channels (online
shops selling material products) [6]. Another possibility is to communicate virtually with the customer
(e.g., using web advertisements, e-mails, websites, social media, video conferences) [23,69].
4.3. Customer Relationships
Building and maintaining relationships with customers can underlie the main principle of the
circular economy—eliminating waste—twofold. Those two options encompass producing on order,
and engaging customers to vote for which product to make [7]. Additionally, a switch to recycling 2.0
may enhance social-marketing strategies and leverage relationships with community partners [25,69].
4.4. Revenue Streams
Revenue streams are essentially the ways in which a company makes money. There are several
circular propositions, mainly associated with the product-service systems [7,31]. The first is an
input-based PSS, like pay per product or pay per service. The second is availability-based PSS,
encompassing a subscription-based rental where, against a low, periodic fee, consumers can use
a product or service; or a progressive purchase, where customers periodically pay small amounts
before the purchase. The third is usage-based PSS like pay per use, which is a one-time payment to
use a product or service. The fourth one is performance-based, like performance-based contracting.
However, several performance-based PSSes are possible, like solution-oriented (e.g., selling a promised
level of heat transfer efficiency instead of selling radiators), effect-oriented (e.g., selling a promised
temperature level in a building instead of selling radiators), and demand-fulfilment oriented (e.g.,
selling a promised level of thermal comfort for building occupants instead of selling radiators) [31].
Two traditional options of revenue streams concern selling pure products or pure services [36]. Revenue
streams depend on the value proposition.
Moreover, revenue streams may be related to retrieved value, generated from products,
components and/or raw materials collected back. For example product components, when collected
back, are resold after they were restored to “as-new” quality, or remanufactured, or used to create a
new product if they carry a high value [5,25]. Despite how low or high the value, it must be sufficient
to make the material loops economically reasonable. Retrieved value may also be related to energy
captured from waste disposal [4].
4.5. Key Resources
The assets required to create, offer and deliver value propositions via chosen channels, to build
and maintain relationships and to receive revenue flows, correspond with the principles guiding the
circular economy in two major ways. One is focused on input choices and the second on regenerating
and restoring the natural capital.
The input choices are related to changing input materials and products. This can be done through
so-called circular sourcing, which applies the principle of using only products or materials obtained
488
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
from closed material loops along four circular flows [5,7,28]. Another way to achieve this is direct
substitution of resources with better-performing materials, which are “less harmful to the environment,
more feasible to use and have the same or better technical requirements” [32] (p. 27). Next option is
direct virtualization of materials, as for instance through digitalization [23,68].
Natural capital regeneration and restoring concerns using energy from renewable sources, land
restoration or reclamation, saving water, operating in more efficient buildings, and choosing sustainable
production locations like eco-parks [3].
4.6. Key Activities
The key activities which directly or indirectly lead to creating, offering and delivering the
value propositions, may apply the CE principles in several ways. Some are oriented on increasing
performance, product design, technology exchange, and the other on remanufacturing, recycling or
even lobbying.
Increasing performance can be obtained through good housekeeping, better process control,
equipment modification and technology changes, sharing and virtualization. Good housekeeping
and process control involve not only optimization of the process by elimination of any fault that
would result in unnecessary losses, like spills, leakage, overheating etc., but also effective and efficient
planning and regulating of the process to ensure optimal conditions such as temperature, pH, pressure,
water level, time, etc. [32]. This requires, for instance, continuous monitoring and management,
a regular preventive maintenance program, raising staff environmental awareness, and incentive
mechanisms, and is supported by lean thinking and lean management [3,32]. Recently, another way of
increasing performance has been introduced—the “bring your own device” model [76]. It assumes
that users bring their own devices in order to get the access to services, and thus the quantity of
products required to meet market need is being reduced. An example is Citrix where employees are
paid for bringing their own computers into the company to use on the company’s network for work
and home [76]. Equipment modification and technology changes improve the production process
or replace one with another, and in turn increase efficient utilization of raw materials, water, energy,
reduce emissions and eliminatestoxic materials from production [32]. A good example is using 3D
printing to produce what is needed [7]. Increasing performance may be related also with sharing and
virtualizing office space through flexible seating, desk-sharing, office hoteling, tele-working, audio
and video conferences, the “internet of things”, big data and machine learning [23,28,67].
Appropriate product design enables using less raw material or energy, to reduce emissions
and toxic materials, prolonging product life, eliminating waste before resource-life extension, and
to circulate the product, components and materials in a 100% closed material loop, according to the
Cradle-to-Cradle concept [1,3,16,25,32].
Moreover, sometimes lobbying for the changes of legislation and political incentives to accelerate
the circular economy is necessary [3,4,6,7,22]. When a company is directly engaged in lobbying, then it
becomes the key activity. Otherwise lobbying depends on third-party entities and is considered as an
adaptation factor.
4.7. Key Partnerships
Cooperative networks allow businesses to receive advantages from supplies, and support a
company in research, product design, marketing, office support, supply routes, financial functions,
production processes, and management [3,16]. Thus, collaboration enhances obtaining key resources
and performing key activities. For instance, off-site recycling is done by other parties that recycle
the industrial wastes at the post-consumer stage or recycle the specific wastes, which then are sold
to other industries [32]. Collaborative production, based on the cooperation in the production value
chain, allows the materials to circulate in a so-called closed material loop [7]. Sheu [65] argues that
collaborative relationships play an important role in the green supply chains. Robinson et al. [66]
showed that business models for solar-powered charging stations to develop infrastructure for electric
489
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
vehicles may need a strong engagement of public organizations as collaborating partners. Considering
the value chain and supply chain, the more circular partners in those chains, the more circular the
economy. The “butterfly diagram” developed by the Ellen MacArthur Foundation shows the key role
of manufactures and recycling companies [4]. Without collaboration, achieving circularity is hardly
possible [53,54]. However, regarding cooperation types, different strategies support different business
models [86].
4.8. Cost Structure
The reviewed literature provided no good examples on how the cost structure can enhance
implementation of CE principles. However, whenever a company decides to change the cost structure
it might require further organizational changes, such as for materials, energy consumption, staff
behavior etc., and in turn elicit more circular changes to the business model. This process could start
with the analysis of the cost structure. In this regard, cost structure-related criteria can help to evaluate
efficiency of optimization policies [11,22]. Cost structure is usually mentioned when the implications
and potential benefits of CE are described. It may pertain to cost savings related to PSS or reverse
material flow [62–64,70], production costs in agriculture [71], costs of product development [72], or
investments [10].
4.9. The Need for Additional Components of a Business Model Related to the Circular Economy
The literature review conducted allowed the identification of how the principles of the circular
economy can be applied to the nine components of the business model [8]. An overview according to
the ReSOLVE framework is presented in Table 4.
Table 4. How the circular economy principles apply to the components of business model.
BM Components Regenerate Share Optimize Loop Virtualize Exchange
Partners X X
Activities X X X X
Resources X X X X
Value proposition and
Customer segments X X X
Customer relations
Channels X
Cost structure X X X X
Revenue streams X X
Potential to develop
the BM framework
Take-back system X
Adoption factors X X X X X X
Note: X indicates that the circular economy principles apply to the particular component of business model.
It supports the conclusion that especially two areas related to CE should be introduced to the
business model framework in order to enhance designing more circular business models. These are
the take-back system [4,7,24,28] and the adoption factors [5].
5. Conceptualizing the Framework of the Circular Business Model Canvas
5.1. Key Areas of Redesigning a Business Model Framework
The conducted study revealed two additional components of the business model framework in
order to develop a circular business model framework. This section continues to build on the concept
of the business model canvas [8], and describes the novelties and, as a result, proposes a circular
business model canvas.
490
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
5.2. Take-Back System
Material loops are the core idea of the circular economy [2,4,11]. This idea assumes that
products, their components and/or materials can be cascaded (in case of biological nutrients), and
reused/redistributed, remanufactured/refurbished, or recycled (in case of technical nutrients), which
requires prior collecting back from the consumer and reverse logistics [4,7,24,28]. The principles of the
Circular Economy applied to reverse logistics are related to take-back management, incentivized return
and reuse, and collection of used products. For example I:CO is an H&M partner which collects used
clothes, and Vodafone introduced the buy-back program New Every Year/Red Hot [1,76]. According
to the direction of material flow in a supply chain, both forward and reverse are possible [24], but
reversed logistics may require different partners, channels and customer relations, and thus a new
component can be distinguished in order to differentiate the specificity of forward and reverse logistics.
5.3. Adoption Factors
Due to the various reasons for rejecting circular business models [5], a company must anticipate
and counteract them. There are internal and external factors affecting adaptation of a business model
to the circular economy principles.
Internal factors concern organizational capabilities to shift towards the circular economy business
model. Such capabilities require intangible resources, like team motivation and organizational culture,
knowledge and transition procedures. These components are based on developing human resources
and team building, and the application of change management instruments [3,16,22,28,32,53], on using
business models’ design methods and tools [3,7,8,10,11,14,16,46], and evaluation models [11,22,23].
External factors comprise technological, political, sociocultural, and economic issues [53].
Technological issues pertain to the possibilities to use adequate IT and data management technologies
to support material tracking [3,22,45] and other specific technologies e.g., recycling [53,54], monitoring
legislation and political incentives [3,6,53], and if necessary lobbying for them [38,73]. There are crucial
socioeconomic benefits justifying the efforts of lobbying for the changes of legislation and political
incentives to accelerate CE [3,4,6,7,22]. Another two groups of factors concern sociocultural issues, like
customer habits and public opinion, and economic forces like predictable demand for future products
or previous difficulties of business entities in adoption of CE principles [11,14,16,47,53,54]. Although
the list of various factors is much wider and open-ended, Roos [53] identified a list of questions
supporting practitioners in adopting circularity into business models.
5.4. The Framework of the Circular Business Model Canvas
The circular business model canvas is extended and adjusted to the circular economy version of
the business model canvas developed by Osterwalder and Pigneur [8] and others [37]. It has eleven
components; however, one component encompasses three sub-components. Those building blocks
allow the designing of a business model according to the principles of circular economy, and consists of:
(1) Value propositions—offered by circular products enabling product-life extension, product-service
system, virtualized services, and/or collaborative consumption. Moreover, this component
comprises the incentives and benefits offered to the customers for bringing back used products
(2) Customer segments—directly linked with value proposition component. Value proposition
design depicts the fit between value proposition and customer segments
(3) Channels—possibly virtualized through selling virtualized value proposition and delivering it
also virtually, selling non-virtualized value propositions via virtual channels, and communicating
with customers virtually
(4) Customer relationships—underlying production on order and/or what customers decide, and
social-marketing strategies and relationships with community partners when recycling 2.0
is implemented
491
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
(5) Revenue streams—relying on the value propositions and comprising payments for a circular
product or service, or payments for delivered availability, usage, or performance related to the
product-based service offered. Revenues may also pertain to the value of resources retrieved from
material loops
(6) Key resources—choosing suppliers offering better-performing materials, virtualization of
materials, resources allowing to regenerate and restore natural capital, and/or the resources
obtained from customers or third parties meant to circulate in material loops (preferably closed)
(7) Key activities—focused on increasing performance through good housekeeping, better process
control, equipment modification and technology changes, sharing and virtualization, and on
improving the design of the product, to make it ready for material loops and becoming more
eco-friendly. Key activities might also comprise lobbying
(8) Key partnerships—based on choosing and cooperating with partners, along the value chain and
supply chain, which support the circular economy
(9) Cost structure—reflecting financial changes made in other components of CBM, including the
value of incentives for customers. Special evaluation criteria and accounting principles must be
applied to this component
(10) Take-Back system—the design of the take-back management system including channels and
customer relations related to this system
(11) Adoption factors—transition towards circular business model must be supported by various
organizational capabilities and external factors
Figure 3 below presents an overview of the circular business model canvas.
Figure 3. A framework of the circular business model canvas. Source: adapted from Osterwalder and
Pigneur [8].
5.5. The Triple Fit Challenge as the Enabler of the Transition Towards a Circular Business Model
The general assumption of the business model design is that all its building blocks fit each
other [8]. However, the value proposition design [37] implies that some fits are more important than
others, and should be considered as the key success factors for a business model. In this regard there
are three main challenges to overcome in order to enable the transition from a linear to a circular
business model.
492
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
The first fit is between the value proposition, including the take-back system, and customer
segments [37,51]. The second fit is between the cost structure and revenue streams. Simply the costs
and revenues must be balanced, and the business model should indicate possibilities for profits [56,84].
This also pertains to other cycles of selling products (e.g., reused, recycled) [18,87]. The third fit is
between the changes a company implements towards more circular business model and adaptation
factors which can hinder this process (e.g., [3,6,11,16,22,50,53,56,57]).
Figure 4. The challenge of triple fit.
5.6. Advantages and Disadvantages of the Circular Business Model Canvas
The business model canvas developed by Osterwalder and Pigneur [8] can been used to design
circular business models because every business model is to some extent linear and circular at the
same time. This framework supports the process of designing a business model, but does not indicate
how the principles of the circular economy or the business actions implementing CE are related to
particular components of the business model. In turn, the ReSOLVE framework shows how the
principles of the circular economy are translated into business actions implementing CE, but not
in relation to business model components and design process. The circular business model canvas
(CMBC) combines these two elements. There are some examples combining sustainability principles
and business model components [88], albeit on a very general level and more useful for explanatory
purposes than for supporting practitioners in designing business models. Hence, CBMC has some
advantages as compared to the original canvas or the archetypes of sustainable business models.
Firstly, CMBC points out the ways of applying circularity to each component of the business
model. As a result, it provides the entrepreneur with a selection of possibilities to be applied to one,
several or all of the business model components. This supports different speeds of change—radical
and incremental. Secondly, CMBC comprises and emphasizes additional components which are crucial
to CE—take-back systems and adoption factors. Thirdly, CMBC indicates the three main challenges
in the transition from a linear to circular business model, which the original canvas does not include.
Fourthly, it combines the original components of the canvas with CE principles in one framework,
which as a practical tool is easier and more user friendly than the triple-layered business model canvas
(TLBMC) aimed to support the creation of sustainable business models [89].
There are also some disadvantages of CBMC. Due to its focus on CE principles, it is less useful
in designing linear business models. Moreover, the new framework is also more complex, and thus
more difficult to apply than the original one. Besides, this is a conceptualization, so its real usability in
designing processes has yet to be empirically verified.
6. Future Research
This study was based on the literature review which implies two major limitations. First,
it comprises mainly the literature related to the circular economy. Because there is some
disagreement in the literature surrounding the questions whether and how circular economy and
sustainability are linked and overlapping concepts [3,11], the wider literature on sustainable business
models [21,41,90,91] was considered here to a lesser extent. Moreover, there is a substantial body of
493
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
literature related to each school of thought underlying the circular economy, especially industrial
ecology, industrial symbiosis, industrial metabolism, and cleaner production. Each and within each of
them there is enough research to conduct comprehensive review studies. Govindan, Soleimani, and
Kannan’s [24] study is a good example of such a review. This literature was also considered here to
a lesser extent, due to intentional focus on circular economy, and inclusion of those concepts in the
literature on circular economy. The second limitation of this study pertains to the lack of empirical
evidence; further research could therefore focus on empirical verification of the applicability of the
proposed framework of the circular business model, in various business settings, especially of the
new components like retrieved value proposition which requires empirical verification and further
cognition. A detailed empirical investigation of the value proposition design in the context of the
circular economy would be very interesting and promising. Does value proposition design need to
be adjusted to the circular economy? What are the customer’s pains and gains related to the circular
economy and how could a fit with value proposition be achieved? In this regard, the newest book by
Osterwalder et al. [37] provides a good starting point to consider. Another direction could explore
how the three fits (in the triple fit challenge) are interrelated. Some critical success factors for circular
business models could be derived from such research. A heavily underexplored area is related to
applying circularity to business models of public sector organizations and also non-governmental
organizations. One of many possible routes of investigation is how the public sector and NGOs may
benefit from partnerships with business [66,92].
7. Conclusions
There are two very vital areas of managerial practice which have recently garnered a great deal of
research interest: business models and the circular economy. This study focuses on both of them, and
investigates circular business models. Not many studies have been conducted on this specific topic.
Most of the studies focused on a particular type of circular business model, its specificity and context.
Those models are related to various schools of thought underlying the concept of the circular economy,
and they appear in the literature pertaining to sustainability, industrial ecology, cleaner production,
and a closed-loop economy with different names. However, most of them can be reflected by the
ReSOLVE framework developed by the Ellen MacArthur Foundation. The literature also indicated
numerous adoption factors, design and managerial tools, and evaluation models needed for circular
business models to operate.
Regarding the design of circular business models, existing literature identified various circular
business models, few business activities pertaining to the circular economy and some guidelines how
to adapt existing business model to the circular economy. Yet, those studies were mostly case-based,
and provided specific business models, but with limitations in their transferability. Although existing
frameworks of business models can be used to apply the principles of the circular economy, hardly
any study identified how the CE principles can be applied to each component of the business model
framework. Hence, there is a need for a comprehensive conceptual framework for the circular business
model to support practitioners in the transition of their businesses towards circular economy.
This paper addresses the issue of designing a circular business model from the perspective of
every company. It identifies how the principles of the circular economy apply to a popular business
model framework, and supplements this framework with additional components relevant to the
circular economy. In turn, the circular business model canvas has been developed on the basis of
the business model canvas. The CBMC consists of eleven building blocks, encompassing not only
traditional components with minor modifications, but also material loops and adaptation factors.
The triple fit challenge to implement a circular business model has been identified as a success factor.
The provided framework should assist practitioners in designing circular business models; however,
it requires further examination due to limitations of this study.
494
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
The conceptual framework of the circular business model proposed in this paper contributes to
the discussion on implementation of the circular economy, and supports practitioners with a tool to
accelerate the transition from linearity to circularity on a micro-level.
Conflicts of Interest: Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.
References
1. Ellen MacArthur Foundation. Towards the Circular Economy: Accelerating the Scale-up
Across Global Supply Chains. Available online: http://www3.weforum.org/docs/ WEF_ENV_
TowardsCircularEconomy_Report_2014.pdf (accessed on 31 December 2015).
2. Ellen MacArthur Foundation. Towards the Circular Economy. Opportunities for the Consumer Goods
Sector. Available online: http://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/downloads/ publications/
TCE_Report-2013.pdf (accessed on 31 December 2015).
3. Scott, J.T. The Sustainable Business a Practitioner’s Guide to Achieving Long-Term Profitability and Competitiveness,
2nd ed.; Greenleaf Publishing: Sheffield, UK, 2015.
4. Ellen MacArthur Foundation. Towards the Circular Economy: Economic and Business Rationale
for an Accelerated Transition. Available online: http://mvonederland.nl/system/files/media/
towards-the-circular-economy.pdf (accessed on 31 December 2015).
5. Planing, P. Business Model Innovation in a Circular Economy Reasons for Non-Acceptance of Circular
Business Models. Open J. Bus. Model Innov. 2015. in press.
6. Ellen MacArthur Foundation. Delivering the Circular Economy a Toolkit for Policymakers; Ellen MacArthur
Foundation: Cowes, UK, 2015.
7. Van Renswoude, K.; Wolde, A.T.; Joustra, D.J. Circular Business Models. Part 1: An introduction to
IMSA’s Circular Business Model Scan. Available online: https://groenomstilling.erhvervsstyrelsen.dk/
sites/default/files/media/imsa_circular_business_models_-_april_2015_-_part_1.pdf (accessed on 31
December 2015).
8. Osterwalder, A.; Pigneur, Y. Business Model Generation: A Handbook for Visionaries, Game Changers, and
Challengers; JohnWiley and Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2010.
9. Wirtz, B.W. Business Model Management: Design—Instruments—Success Factors, 1st ed.; Springer
Science+Business Media B.V.: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2011.
10. Barquet, A.P.B.; de Oliveira, M.G.; Amigo, C.R.; Cunha, V.P.; Rozenfeld, H. Employing the business model
concept to support the adoption of product-service systems (PSS). Ind. Mark. Manag. 2013, 42, 693–704.
[CrossRef]
11. Mentink, B. Circular Business Model Innovation: A Process Framework and a Tool for Business Model
Innovation in a Circular Economy. Master’s Thesis, Delft University of Technology & Leiden University,
Leiden, The Netherlands, 2014.
12. Lüdeke-Freund, F. Towards a Conceptual Framework of Business Models for Sustainability. In Knowledge
Collaboration & Learning for Sustainable Innovation, Proceedings of the ERSCP-EMSU Conference, Delft,
The Netherlands, 25–29 October 2010.
13. Dewulf, K.R. Play it forward: A Game-based tool for Sustainable Product and Business Model Innovation
in the Fuzzy Front End. In Knowledge Collaboration & Learning for Sustainable Innovation, Proceedings of the
ERSCP-EMSU Conference, Delft, The Netherlands, 25–29 October 2010.
14. De Jong, E.; Engelaer, F.; Mendoza, M. Realizing Opportunities of a Circular Business Model. Available online:
http://circulatenews.org/2015/04/de-lage-landen-realising-the-opportunities-of-a-circular-business-model
(accessed on 31 December 2015).
15. Pateli, A.G.; Giaglis, G.M. A research framework for analysing eBusiness models. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 2004, 13,
302–314. [CrossRef]
16. Joustra, D.J.; de Jong, E.; Engelaer, F. Guided Choices towards a Circular Business Model; North-West Europe
Interreg IVB: Lille, France, 2013.
17. Lovins, A.B.; Lovins, L.H.; Hawken, P.; June, M.A.Y. A Road Map for Natural Capitalism. Harv. Bus. Rev.
1999, 77, 145–158. [PubMed]
495
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
18. Linder, M.; Williander, M. Circular Business Model Innovation: Inherent Uncertainties. Bus. Strateg. Environ.
2015. [CrossRef]
19. Ayres, R.U.; Simonis, U.E. Industrial Metabolism: Restructuring for Sustainable Development; United Nations
University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1994.
20. Renner, G.T. Geography of Industrial Localization. Econ. Geogr. 1947, 23, 167–189. [CrossRef]
21. Boons, F.; Lüdeke-Freund, F. Business models for sustainable innovation: state-of-the-art and steps towards
a research agenda. J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 45, 9–19. [CrossRef]
22. Laubscher, M.; Marinelli, T. Integration of Circular Economy in Business. In Proceedings of the Conference:
Going Green—CARE INNOVATION 2014, Vienna, Austria, 17–20 November 2014.
23. Ellen MacArthur Foundation. Growth Within: A Circular Economy Vision for a Competitive Europe; Ellen
MacArthur Foundation: Cowes, UK, 2015.
24. Govindan, K.; Soleimani, H.; Kannan, D. Reverse logistics and closed-loop supply chain: A comprehensive
review to explore the future. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2014, 240, 603–626. [CrossRef]
25. Lacy, P.; Rosenberg, D.; Drewell, Q.; Rutqvist, J. 5 Business Models that are Driving the Circular
Economy. Available online: http://www.fastcoexist.com/1681904/5-Business-Models-That-Are-Drivingthe-
Circular-Economy (accessed on 31 December 2015).
26. Bakker, C.A.; den Hollander, M.C.; van Hinte, E.; Zijlstra, Y. Products That Last—Product Design for Circular
Business Models, 1st ed.; TU Delft Library/Marcel den Hollander IDRC: Delft, The Netherlands, 2014.
27. Damen, M.A. A Resources Passport for a Circular Economy. Master’s Thesis, Utrecht University, Utrecht,
The Netherlands, 2012.
28. Lacy, P.; Keeble, J.; McNamara, R.; Rutqvist, J.; Haglund, T.; Cui, M.; Cooper, A.; Pettersson, C.; Kevin, E.;
Buddemeier, P.; et al. Circular Advantage: Innovative Business Models and Technologies to Create Value in a World
without Limits to Growth; Accenture: Chicago, IL, USA, 2014.
29. WRAP. Innovative Business Model Map. Available online: http://www.wrap.org.uk/content/innovativebusiness-
model-map (accessed on 4 October 2015).
30. Tukker, A.; Tischner, U. Product-services as a research field: Past, present and future. Reflections from a
decade of research. J. Clean. Prod. 2006, 14, 1552–1556. [CrossRef]
31. Van Ostaeyen, J.; van Horenbeek, A.; Pintelon, L.; Duflou, J.R. A refined typology of product–service systems
based on functional hierarchy modeling. J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 51, 261–276. [CrossRef]
32. El-Haggar, S. Cleaner Production. In Sustainable Industrial Design and Waste Management: Cradle-to-Cradle for
Sustainable Development; Academic Press: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2007.
33. Bakker, C.;Wang, F.; Huisman, J.; den Hollander,M. Products that go round: Exploring product life extension
through design. J. Clean. Prod. 2014, 69, 10–16. [CrossRef]
34. Moser, F.; Jakl, T. Chemical leasing—A review of implementation in the past decade. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res.
2014, 22, 6325–6348. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Bautista-Lazo, S. Sustainable Manufacturing: Turning Waste Into Profitable Co-Products; University of Liverpool:
Liverpool, UK, 2013.
36. Tukker, A. Eight Types of Product Service Systems: Eight Ways To Sustainability? Bus. Strateg. Environ. 2004,
13, 246–260. [CrossRef]
37. Osterwalder, A.; Pigneur, Y.; Bernarda, G.; Smith, A. Value Proposition Design: How to Create Products and
Services Customers Want; JohnWiley and Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2014.
38. Stubbs,W.; Cocklin, C. Conceptualizing a “Sustainability Business Model”. Organ. Environ. 2008, 21, 103–127.
[CrossRef]
39. Roome, N.; Louche, C. Journeying Toward Business Models for Sustainability: A Conceptual Model Found
Inside the Black Box of Organisational Transformation. Organ. Environ. 2015. [CrossRef]
40. Gauthier, C.; Gilomen, B. Business Models for Sustainability: Energy Efficiency in Urban Districts.
Organ. Environ. 2015. [CrossRef]
41. Abdelkafi, N.; Täuscher, K. Business Models for Sustainability From a System Dynamics Perspective.
Organ. Environ. 2015. [CrossRef]
42. Jabło ´ nski, A. Design and Operationalization of Technological Business Models. Acta Univ. Agric. Silvic.
Mendelianae Brun. 2015, 63, 927–935. [CrossRef]
43. Upward, A.; Jones, P. An Ontology for Strongly Sustainable Business Models: Defining an Enterprise
Framework Compatible With Natural and Social Science. Organ. Environ. 2015. [CrossRef]
496
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
44. Nilsson, N.; Söderberg, V. How to Future Proof a Business Model: Capture and Capitalize Value in the Field
of Urban Mining. Master’s Thesis, Blekinge Institute of Technology, Karlskrona, Sweden, 2015.
45. Parlikad, A.K.; Mcfarlane, D.; Fleisch, E.; Gross, S. The Role of Product Identity in End-of-Life Decision
Making. Available online: www.alexandria.unisg.ch/export/DL/Sandra_Gross/21460.pdf (accessed on 31
December 2015).
46. Guinée, J.B. Handbook on Life Cycle Assessment: Operational Guide to the ISO Standards. In Book Review:
The Second Dutch LCA-Guide; Springer Science+Business Media B.V.: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2002;
pp. 311–313.
47. DeWinter, J. Circular Business Models: An Opportunity to Generate New Value, Recover Value and Mitigate
Risk Associated with Pressure on Raw Material Availability and Price Volatility. Master’s Thesis, University
of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2014.
48. Scheepens, A.E.; Vogtländer, J.G.; Brezet, J.C. Two life cycle assessment (LCA) based methods to analyse
and design complex (regional) circular economy systems. Case: Making water tourism more sustainable.
J. Clean. Prod. 2015. in press. [CrossRef]
49. Beuren, F.H.; Gomes Ferreira, M.G.; Cauchick Miguel, P.A. Product-service systems: A literature review on
integrated products and services. J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 47, 222–231. [CrossRef]
50. Jabło ´ nski, A. Network Dynamics and Business Model Dynamics in Improving a Company’s Performance.
Int. J. Econ. Commer. Manag. 2015, 3, 1–10.
51. Pearce, J.A. The Profit-Making Allure of Product Reconstruction. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 2009, 50, 59–65.
52. Zairul, M.; Wamelink, J.W.; Gruis, V.; John, L. New industrialised housing model for young starters in
Malaysia: Identifying problems for the formulation of a new business model for the housing industry.
In Proceedings of the APNHR 2015: The Asia Pacific Network for Housing Research, Gwangju, Korea, 9–11
April 2015.
53. Roos, G. Business Model Innovation to Create and Capture Resource Value in Future Circular Material
Chains. Resources 2014, 3, 248–274. [CrossRef]
54. Bechtel, N.; Bojko, R.; Völkel, R. Be in the Loop: Circular Economy & Strategic Sustainable Development.
Master’s Thesis, Blekinge Institute of Technology, Karlskrona, Sweden, 2013.
55. United Nation Environment Programme (UNEP). Product-Service Systems and Sustainability; UNEP:
Washington, DC, USA, 2002; pp. 1–31.
56. Besch, K. Product-service systems for office furniture: Barriers and opportunities on the European market.
J. Clean. Prod. 2005, 13, 1083–1094. [CrossRef]
57. Heese, H.S.; Cattani, K.; Ferrer, G.; Gilland, W.; Roth, A.V. Competitive advantage through take-back of used
products. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2005, 164, 143–157. [CrossRef]
58. Walsh, B. PSS for Product Life Extension through Remanufacturing. In Proceedings of the 2nd CIRP IPS2
Conference, Linköping, Sweden, 14–15 April 2010; pp. 261–266.
59. Firnkorn, J.; Müller, M. Selling Mobility instead of Cars: New Business Strategies of Automakers and the
Impact on Private Vehicle Holding. Bus. Strateg. Environ. 2012, 21, 264–280. [CrossRef]
60. Shafiee, A.; Stec, T. Gaining a Competitive Advantage with Sustainable Business—Implementing Inductive
Charging using Systems Thinking, A Benchmarking of EVs and PHEVs. Master’s Thesis, Chalmers
University of Technology, Göteborg, Sweden, 2014.
61. Andersson, D.; Stavileci, S. An Assessment of How Circular Economy can Be Implemented in the Aerospace
Industry. Master’s Thesis, Blekinge Institute of Technology, Karlskrona, Sweden, 2015.
62. Jasch, C. How to perform an environmental management cost assessment in one day. J. Clean. Prod. 2006, 14,
1194–1213. [CrossRef]
63. Jasch, C. Environmental management accounting (EMA) as the next step in the evolution of management
accounting. J. Clean. Prod. 2006, 14, 1190–1193. [CrossRef]
64. Gale, R. Environmental management accounting as a reflexive modernization strategy in cleaner production.
J. Clean. Prod. 2006, 14, 1228–1236. [CrossRef]
65. Sheu, J.-B. Green Supply Chain Collaboration for Fashionable Consumer Electronics Products under
Third-Party Power Intervention—A Resource Dependence Perspective. Sustainability 2014, 6, 2832–2875.
[CrossRef]
66. Robinson, J.; Brase, G.; Griswold, W.; Jackson, C.; Erickson, L. Business Models for Solar Powered Charging
Stations to Develop Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles. Sustainability 2014, 6, 7358–7387. [CrossRef]
497
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
67. Rifkin, J. The Zero Marginal Cost Society: The Internet of Things, the Collaborative Commons, and the Eclipse of
Capitalism; St. Martin’s Press: New York, NY, USA, 2014.
68. Freyermuth, G.S. Edges & Nodes/Cities & Nets: The History and Theories of Networks and What
They Tell Us about Urbanity in the Digital Age. Available online: http://periodicals.narr.de/index.php/
real/article/view/1576/1555 (accessed on 31 December 2015).
69. Waste Management. Recycling 2.0: Recycling Engagement and Education. Available online:
http://www.cafr.org/summit/speakers/ppt/2015-06-08_11:10:00__Robinson_Susan.pdf (accessed on 31
December 2015).
70. Subramanian, N.; Gunasekaran, A. Cleaner supply-chain management practices for twenty-first-century
organizational competitiveness: Practice-performance framework and research propositions.
Int. J. Prod. Econ. 2015, 164, 216–233. [CrossRef]
71. Sivertsson, O.; Tell, J. Barriers to Business Model Innovation in Swedish Agriculture. Sustainability 2015, 7,
1957–1969. [CrossRef]
72. Berning, A.; Venter, C. Sustainable Supply Chain Engagement in a Retail Environment. Sustainability 2015, 7,
6246–6263. [CrossRef]
73. Skelton, K.; Pattis, A. Life Cycle Management In Product Development: A Comparative Analysis of Industry
Practices Kristen. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Life Cycle Management, Gothenburg,
Sweden, 25–28 August 2013.
74. Pearce, D.W.; Turner, R.K. Economics of Natural Resources and the Environment; Johns Hopkins University
Press: Baltiomre, MD, USA, 1990.
75. Frankenberger, K.; Weiblen, T.; Csik, M.; Gassmann, O. The 4I-framework of business model innovation:
A structured view on process phases and challenges. Int. J. Prod. Dev. 2013, 18, 249–273. [CrossRef]
76. WRAP. Innovative Business Models. Available online: http://www.wrap.org.uk/content/innovativebusiness-
models-1 (accessed on 31 December 2015).
77. Mahadevan, B. Business Models for Internet-Based E-Commerce: An Anatomy. Calif. Manag. Rev. 2000, 42,
55–69. [CrossRef]
78. Afuah, A.; Tucci, C.L. Internet Business Models and Strategies: Text and Cases, 1st ed.; Mcgraw-Hill College:
Columbus, OH, USA, 2000.
79. Papakiriakopoulos, D.A.; Poylumenakou, A.K.; Doukidis, G.J. Building E-Business Models: An Analytical
Framework and Development Guidlines. In Proceedings of the 14th Bled Electronic Commerce Conference,
Bled, Slovenia, 25–26 June 2001.
80. Chesbrough, H.; Rosenbloom, R.S. The role of the business model in capturing value from innovation:
evidence from Xerox Corporation’s technology spin-off companies. Ind. Corp. Chang. 2002, 11, 529–555.
[CrossRef]
81. Linder, J.; Cantrell, S. Changing Business Models: Surveying the Landscape; Accenture Institute for Strategic
Change: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2000.
82. Al-debei, M.M.; El-Haddadeh, R.; Avison, D. Defining the Business Model in the New World of Digital
Business. In Proceedings of the 14th Americas Conference on Information Systems, Toronto, ON, Canada,
14–17 August 2008.
83. Osterwalder, A.; Pigneur, Y.; Tucci, C.L. Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and Future of the
Concept. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 2005, 16, 1–25.
84. Bautista-Lazo, S.; Short, T. Introducing the All Seeing Eye of Business: A model for understanding the nature,
impact and potential uses of waste. J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 40, 141–150. [CrossRef]
85. Buxel, H.; Esenduran, G.; Griffin, S. Strategic sustainability: Creating business value with life cycle analysis.
Bus. Horiz. 2015, 58, 109–122. [CrossRef]
86. Saebi, T.; Foss, N.J. Business models for open innovation: Matching heterogenous open innovation strategies
with business model dimensions. Eur. Manag. J. 2014, 33, 201–213. [CrossRef]
87. Kocabasoglu, C.; Prahinski, C.; Klassen, R.D. Linking forward and reverse supply chain investments: The role
of business uncertainty. J. Oper. Manag. 2007, 25, 1141–1160. [CrossRef]
88. Bocken, N.M.P.; Short, S.W.; Rana, P.; Evans, S. A literature and practice review to develop sustainable
business model archetypes. J. Clean. Prod. 2014, 65, 42–56. [CrossRef]
498
Sustainability 2016, 8, 43
89. Joyce, A.; Paquin, R.; Pigneur, Y. The triple layered business model canvas: A tool to design more sustainable
business models. In Proceedings of the ARTEM Organizational Creativity International Conference, Nancy,
France, 26–27 March 2015.
90. Talonen, T.; Hakkarainen, K. Elements of sustainable business models. Int. J. Innov. Sci. 2014, 6, 43–54.
[CrossRef]
91. Seay, S.S. How incorporating a sustainable business model creates value. Bus. Stud. J. 2015, 7, 46–61.
92. Lewandowski, M. Introduction to Academic Entrepreneurship. In Academic Entrepreneurship and Technological
Innovation; Szopa, A., Karwowski,W., Ordóñez de Pablos, P., Eds.; IGI Global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2013.
© 2016 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
499

MDPI
St. Alban-Anlage 66
4052 Basel
Switzerland
Tel. +41 61 683 77 34
Fax +41 61 302 89 18
www.mdpi.com
Sustainability Editorial Office
E-mail: sustainability@mdpi.com
www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

MDPI
St. Alban-Anlage 66
4052 Basel
Switzerland
Tel: +41 61 683 77 34
Fax: +41 61 302 89 18
www.mdpi.com ISBN 978-3-03897-561-8